1028  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant Aneuploidy screening is offered to pregnant persons in the first trimester or at midgestation to evaluate the risk for common aneuploidies such as Down syndrome (trisomy 21), trisomy 18, trisomy 13, and congenital malformations (e.g., abdominal wall or NTDs) known to cause elevations of various markers. A com- bination of these biochemical markers (including AFP, inhibin A, estriol, pregnancy-­associated plasma protein A, β-­human chori- onic gonadotropin [β-­hCG]) and US increases the positive predic- tive value (PPV) of these screening tests. Fetal DNA in maternal plasma and fetal cells circulating in maternal blood are potential noninvasive sources of material for prenatal genetic testing. This testing, however, is not diagnostic, and a positive test requires either amniocentesis or postnatal analysis to confirm the diagnosis. Nonetheless, fetal karyotyping by analysis of fetal DNA in maternal plasma is another screening test that is very sensitive for the detec- tion of Down syndrome, with a higher PPV than any other prenatal screening test for Down syndrome. Currently, however, the use of this technology is only advocated in pregnancies deemed at high risk for aneuploidy. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 117.7  Treatment and Prevention of Fetal Disease Krishna K. Acharya, Alicia J. Sprecher, and Susan S. Cohen See also Chapter 118. Management of a fetal disease depends on coordinated advances in diagnostic accuracy and knowledge of the disease’s natural history; an understanding of fetal nutrition, pharmacology, immunology, and pathophysiology; the availability of specific active drugs that cross the placenta; and therapeutic procedures. Progress in providing specific treatments for accurately diagnosed diseases has improved with the advent of real-­time ultrasonography, amniocentesis, and cordocentesis (see Tables 117.1 and 117.9). The incidence of sensitization of Rh-­negative women by Rh-­positive fetuses has been reduced by prophylactic administration of Rh(D) immunoglobulin to mothers early in pregnancy and after each delivery or abortion, thus reducing the frequency of hemolytic disease in their subsequent offspring. Fetal erythroblastosis (see Chapter 140) may be accurately detected by fetal Doppler assessment of the peak systolic velocity of the middle cerebral artery and treated with intrauterine transfusions of packed Rh-­negative blood cells via the intraperitoneal or, more often, intraumbilical vein approach. Pharmacologic approaches to fetal immaturity mostly revolve around the administration of antenatal corticosteroids to the mother to promote fetal production of surfactant with a resultant decrease in the incidence of respiratory distress syndrome (see Chapter 126). Tocolytic agents have been demonstrated to prolong pregnancy to allow the administration of antenatal corticosteroids (48 hours); how- ever, there is no proven benefit beyond this time frame. Maternal administration of magnesium sulfate for fetal/neonatal neuroprotec- tion is recommended in pregnancies deemed to be at risk of imminent delivery before 32 weeks’ gestation in light of evidence demonstrating a reduction in frequency of cerebral palsy compared with those who did not receive this treatment. Management of definitively diagnosed fetal genetic disease or congenital anomalies consists of multidisciplinary parental counseling. Rarely, high-­ dose vitamin therapy for a responsive inborn error of metabolism (e.g., biotin-­dependent disorders) or fetal transfusion (with red blood cells or platelets) may be indicated. Fetal surgery is well-­established treatment for certain conditions but remains a largely experimental approach to therapy for other conditions and is available only in a few, highly specialized peri- natal centers (see Table 117.9 and Chapter 118). The nature of the defect and its consequences must be considered, as well as ethical implications for the fetus and the parents. Termination of pregnancy is also an option that should be discussed during the initial phases of counseling. Folic acid supplementation decreases the incidence and recurrence of NTDs. Because the neural tube closes within the first 28 days of con- ception, periconceptional supplementation is needed for prevention. It is recommended that women without a prior history of a NTD ingest 400 μg/day of folic acid throughout their reproductive years. Women with a history of a prior pregnancy complicated by an NTD or a first-­ degree relative with an NTD should have preconceptional counseling and should ingest 4 mg/day of supplemental folic acid beginning at least 1 month before conception. Fortification of cereal-­grain flour with folic acid is established policy in the United States and some other countries. The optimal concentration of folic acid in enriched grains is somewhat controversial. The incidence of NTD in the United States and other countries has decreased significantly since these public health initia- tives were implemented. Use of some antiepileptic drugs (valproate, carbamazepine) during pregnancy is associated with an increased risk of NTD. Women taking these medications should ingest 1-­5 mg of folic acid daily in the preconception period. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Congenital anomalies have always been recognized as a therapeutic challenge. Numerous diagnoses have been evaluated for the possibility of fetal intervention (Tables 118.1 and 118.2). Some have proved ben- eficial to the developing infant, some have been abandoned, and some remain under investigation. FETAL THERAPY ETHICS With the development of advanced fetal ultrasound (US), ultrafast fetal MRI, and fetal echocardiography, the ability to accurately diagnose fetal disease has improved substantially over the past 3 decades. The first prenatal therapeutic intervention was reported in 1963 with the successful treatment of erythroblastosis fetalis by fetal intraperitoneal infusion. Other innovations, though groundbreaking, brought to light the high morbidity (fetal and maternal) and mortality associated with open fetal interventions, and it would take greater experience and tech- niques before open fetal surgery would be safer and therapeutic. OBSTRUCTIVE UROPATHY Obstructive uropathy is a diverse set of diseases affecting the bladder neck or urethra and affects between 2.2 and 3.3 per 10,000 live births. It is most frequently caused by posterior urethral valves (PUVs) but can be caused by a variety of other defects, including urethral atresia, persistent cloaca, caudal regression, and megacystis–microcolon–intestinal hypoperistalsis syndrome (see Chapters 577 and 578). Although male fetuses are more commonly affected, females are more commonly associated with severe pathologic variants, and 30% of survivors will require renal replacement therapy or transplantation before age 5. Congenital obstructive uropathy Chapter 118 Fetal Intervention and Surgery Natalie E. Rintoul, Emily A. Partridge, and Holly L. Hedrick Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 118  u  Fetal Intervention and Surgery  1029 Table 118.1     Fetal Diagnoses Evaluated and Treated in Fetal Centers Amniotic band syndrome (ABS) Anomalies in monochorionic twins Aortic stenosis Arachnoid cyst Bladder exstrophy Bladder outlet obstruction Bronchopulmonary sequestration (BPS) Cervical teratoma Cloaca Cloaca exstrophy Complete heart block Congenital pulmonary airway malformation (CPAM) Congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) Congenital high airway obstruction syndrome (CHAOS) EXIT to airway procedure for CHAOS Conjoined twins Dandy-­Walker malformation Duodenal atresia Encephalocele Enteric duplication atresia Esophageal atresia Gastroschisis Hydrocephalus Hydronephrosis Hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS) Imperforate anus Intraabdominal cyst Lymphangioma Mediastinal teratoma Myelomeningocele, spina bifida Neuroblastoma Obstructive uropathy Omphalocele Pentalogy of Cantrell Pericardial teratoma Pleural effusions Pulmonary agenesis Pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum Sacrococcygeal teratoma (SCT) Twin reversed arterial perfusion (TRAP) sequence Twin-­to-­twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS) Vein of Galen aneurysm EXIT, Ex utero intrapartum treatment. Table 118.2     Indications and Rationales for In Utero Surgery on the Fetus, Placenta, Cord, or Membranes FETAL SURGERY PATHOPHYSIOLOGY RATIONALE FOR IN UTERO INTERVENTION SURGERY ON THE FETUS 1. Congenital diaphragmatic hernia Pulmonary hypoplasia and anatomic substrate for pulmonary hypertension Reversal of pulmonary hypoplasia and reduced degree of pulmonary hypertension Repair of actual defect delayed until after birth 2. Lower urinary tract obstruction Progressive renal damage due to obstructive uropathy Pulmonary hypoplasia due to oligohydramnios Prevention of renal failure and pulmonary hypoplasia by anatomic correction or urinary deviation 3. Sacrococcygeal teratoma High-­output cardiac failure due to AV shunting and/or bleeding Direct anatomic effects of the tumoral mass Polyhydramnios-­related preterm labor Reduction of functional impact of tumor by ablation of tumor or (part of) its vasculature Reduction of anatomic effects by drainage of cysts or bladder Amnioreduction preventing obstetric complications 4. Thoracic space-­occupying lesions Pulmonary hypoplasia (space-­occupying mass) Hydrops due to impaired venous return (mediastinal compression) Creation of space for lung development Reversal of the process of cardiac failure 5. Neural tube defects Damage to exposed neural tube Chronic CSF leak, leading to Arnold-­Chiari malformation and hydrocephalus Prevention of exposure of the spinal cord to amniotic fluid Restoration of CSF pressure correcting Arnold-­Chiari malformation 6. Cardiac malformations Critical lesions causing irreversible hypoplasia or damage to developing heart Reversal of process by anatomic correction of restrictive pathology SURGERY ON THE PLACENTA, CORD, OR MEMBRANES 7. Chorioangioma High-­output cardiac failure due to AV shunting Effects of polyhydramnios Reversal of process of cardiac failure and hydrops fetoplacentalis by ablation or reduction of flow 8. Amniotic bands Progressive constrictions causing irreversible neurologic or vascular damage Prevention of amniotic band syndrome leading to deformities and function loss 9. Abnormal monochorionic twinning: twin-­to-­twin transfusion; fetus acardius, and discordant anomalies Twin-twin transfusion leading to oligopolyhydramnios sequence, hemodynamic changes; preterm labor, and rupture of membranes; in utero damage to brain, heart, or other organs In utero fetal death may cause damage to co-­twin Cardiac failure of pump twin and consequences of polyhydramnios Serious anomaly raising the question of termination of pregnancy Selective feticide Arrest of intertwin transfusion Prevention/reversal of cardiac failure and/or neurologic damage, including at in utero death Prolongation of gestation Selective feticide to arrest parasitic relationship, to prevent consequences of in utero fetal death, and to avoid termination of entire pregnancy AV, Arteriovenous; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid. From Deprest J, Hodges R, Gratacos E, Lewi L. Invasive fetal therapy. In: Creasy RK, Resnick R, Iams JD, et al., eds. Creasy & Resnik’s Maternal-­Fetal Medicine. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2014. Table 35-­1. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1030  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant causes hydronephrosis and renal dysplasia of variable severity. Although the mechanism of renal injury is debated, hypotheses include cyst forma- tion secondary to urinary retention and subsequent disruption of nephro- genesis versus obstruction-­associated apoptosis of renal tubular cells. Obstructive uropathy usually presents on fetal US with an enlarged bladder, bilateral hydroureteronephrosis, and oligohydramnios in the second and third trimester. Mild forms of obstructive uropathy may lead to minimal short-­ or long-­term clinical sequelae. However, reduced fetal urine output resulting in oligohydramnios or anhydram- nios in more severe forms can cause significant pulmonary hypopla- sia, which is associated with death shortly after delivery in >80% of infants. Pulmonary survivors remain subject to high mortality and chronic morbidity resulting from renal dysplasia, renal failure, and the need for chronic renal replacement therapy. Workup of congenital obstructive uropathy includes genetic and structural evaluation, with additional imaging and fetal urinalysis aiding in prognostication. For example, a fetal urine sodium <100 mEq/L, chloride <90 mEq/L, and urine osmolality >210 mEq/L at a mean gestational age of 23.8 weeks predicts “good outcome,” as reflected by the presence of nondysplastic kidneys at autopsy or biopsy, or normal renal and pulmonary function at birth. Fetuses with salvageable renal function should have down-­ trending values of urine sodium, chloride, calcium, total protein and β2-­microglobulin on repeat vesicocentesis. Fetal bladder filling time [(fetal bladder volume 48 hours post-­vesicocentesis − fetal bladder vol- ume prior to vesicocentesis)/fetal bladder volume prior to vesicocente- sis)], fetal MRI, and three-­dimensional fetal cystoscopy have also been shown to have utility in predicting postnatal renal function. The primary objective of fetal intervention in fetuses with obstruc- tive uropathy is restoration of amniotic fluid volume to prevent pul- monary hypoplasia. Although prevention of ongoing renal injury is also desired, the efficacy of fetal intervention in achieving this goal is uncertain. Therefore fetal intervention for obstructive uropathy is cur- rently limited to fetuses in whom the obstruction is sufficient to cause oligohydramnios or anhydramnios. For fetuses that still have adequate renal function and can produce urine, treatment options include vesicoamniotic shunting, valve abla- tion via cystoscopy, and vesicostomy. Vesicoamniotic shunting is the most common and involves percutaneous, US-­guided placement of a double-­pigtailed shunt from the fetal bladder to the amniotic space, allowing decompression of the obstructed bladder and restoration of the amniotic fluid volume (Figs. 118.1 and 118.2). Although simple in concept, bladder decompression may not always occur, and many catheters will become dislodged as the fetus develops; a fetus typically requires three catheter replacements before completion of pregnancy. Vesicoamniotic shunting may improve perinatal survival, but at the expense of poor long-­term renal function. In a systematic review of over 250 fetuses, increased prenatal survival is present in the shunted population, but there is no difference in the 12-­ and 24-­month survival. Fetal cystoscopy is more technically challenging than vesicoamni- otic shunt placement, more invasive, and requires more sedation, but this option holds some important advantages. Cystoscopy allows for direct visualization of the obstruction and does not require amnioinfu- sion. Moreover, when the obstruction is visualized and the diagnosis of PUV confirmed, the valves can be treated, restoring urine flow to the amniotic space, and eliminating the need for repeated fetal inter- ventions in most patients. Creation of a vesicostomy (direct opening from bladder through fetal abdominal wall) by open fetal surgery has improved perinatal survival (Fig. 118.3). However, the current data- set evaluating this approach is still limited, and direct comparisons to shunting suggest no significant difference between these interventions. NONOBSTRUCTIVE RENAL DISEASE Nonobstructive fetal renal disease can result from renal hypoplasia/dys- plasia and from genetic diseases such as autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease. Similar to obstructive uropathy, fetal therapy is focused on restoring amniotic fluid volume in patients with oligohydramnios or anhydramnios. However, restoration of amniotic fluid volume in nonob- structive renal disease requires external sources of amniotic fluid. Cur- rent treatment options include serial percutaneous amnioinfusion and infusion of fluid by amnioport. Serial amnioinfusions are less invasive as a single procedure, but most pregnancies will require weekly infusions to maintain adequate amniotic fluid volume. Amnioinfusion through an amnioport involves open surgical placement of a catheter into the amniotic space that is connected to an ex utero subcutaneous port. This allows repeated fluid infusion into the amniotic space. The amnioport is more challenging and invasive as an individual procedure but provides more reliable access to the amniotic space for the duration of the preg- nancy. Small studies suggest both these procedures improve pulmonary outcomes and perinatal survival in infants with renal disease, but these infants will require dialysis and then renal transplant when the infant is large enough (2-­3 years of age). The Renal Anhydramnios Fetal Therapy (RAFT) is a multi-site clinical trial to determine the feasibility, safety and success rate of serial amnioinfusions for early pregnancy renal anhy- dramnios (EPRA). The trial originally included EPRA caused both by congenital bilateral renal agenesis (CoBRA) and by fetal renal failure Fig. 118.1  Ultrasound image showing fetoscopic placement of a transurethral vesicoamniotic shunt in a patient with posterior urethral valves. (Courtesy Dr. Foong Lim, Cincinnati Fetal Center at Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center.) A B Fig. 118.2  Vesicoamniotic shunt placement. A, The shunt is loaded into the trocar, passed into the bladder, and recoils to a pigtail shape. B, The other end of the shunt recoils to a pigtail outside the abdomi- nal wall, releasing urine into the amniotic fluid space around the fetus. (Copyright 2021, The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 118  u  Fetal Intervention and Surgery  1031 (FRF) with kidney tissue present. At the time of this publication, the CoBRA arm is no longer recruiting. The primary objective of this trial is to determine the proportion of neonates surviving to successful dialysis after serial amnioinfusions. CONGENITAL DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIA Congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) is a structural birth defect in which the diaphragm fails to fully close during development resulting in herniation of the abdominal contents into the thorax and inhibition of fetal lung growth (see Chapter 131). CDH occurs in 1,500 live births in the United States annually and is the leading cause of in-­hospital neona- tal deaths as well as the costliest noncardiac birth defect. Although the pathophysiology of CDH remains unclear, most patients are affected by some degree of pulmonary hypoplasia and persistent pulmonary hyper- tension. A dual-­hit hypothesis has been suggested to characterize lung injury in CDH, with an initial injury occurring during organogenesis resulting in bilateral pulmonary hypoplasia and a secondary insult of the ipsilateral lung due to compression by the herniated abdominal vis- cera. Fetal breathing and fluidic lung distension are features of normal lung development, which are mechanically compromised by the dia- phragmatic defect, resulting in not only reduced parenchymal volume but also decreased vascular density. Compensatory vascular remodeling results in hypermuscularization of the arteriolar bed, increased vascular resistance, and ultimately pulmonary hypertension. It is the severity of pulmonary hypoplasia and persistent pulmonary hypertension that rep- resents the greatest determinant of morbidity and mortality. In mild cases of CDH, surgical repair of the diaphragm is typically performed in the first few days of life after respiratory and hemodynamic stabilization. Although these infants are affected by pulmonary hypopla- sia and close monitoring is required during the first years of life, long-­ term outcomes are excellent in the majority of survivors of mild CDH. In cases of severe CDH, pulmonary hypertension leads to right ventricular dysfunction and right-­to-­left shunting across the patent foramen ovale and ductus arteriosus, which can result in left ventricular dysfunction and cardiac failure necessitating extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) in the perinatal period. Mortality is high in severely affected infants, and survivors often have significant impairments in long-­term respiratory, feeding, and neurodevelopmental outcomes. More than half of all CDH cases are identified on routine second tri- mester anatomy US, whereas delayed diagnosis may occur secondary to small defects, technical limitations, or unavailability of prenatal care. In 50–70% of cases the lesion is isolated, whereas syndromic or complex CDH may be associated with additional anomalies warranting further imaging and genetic studies. Fetal echocardiography and ultrafast MRI should be included in comprehensive fetal diagnosis, permitting calculation of fetal lung volumes as well as ruling out major structural cardiac anomalies. The first reports of attempted in utero repair of CDH noted impair- ment of umbilical blood flow after reduction of the liver resulting in fetal demise in a number of cases. Although the procedure proved to be technically feasible in fetuses without liver herniation, comparative analysis revealed higher rates of preterm delivery (32 vs 38 weeks’ ges- tation) and similar rates of survival (75% fetal repair vs 86% postnatal repair), leading to abandonment of prenatal attempts at surgical repair. Given the disappointing results after attempted open fetal surgical repair of CDH, researchers turned to the fetal lamb model to assess the impact of tracheal ligation on pulmonary development. By blocking the efflux of fetal lung fluid into the amniotic space, pulmonary distension results in increased lung volumes. To mitigate the risks associated with open tra- cheal ligation, a fetoscopic endoluminal tracheal occlusion (FETO) approach with balloon tracheal occlusion was developed (Fig. 118.4). In a study of 210 fetuses with severe hypoplasia due to isolated CDH, the use of FETO had an acceptable safety profile in the mother with improved neonatal survival but increased risk of preterm birth. In this trial the bal- loon was inserted at approximately 28 weeks of gestation and removal at 34 weeks, with this timing based on the hypothesis that tracheal occlusion will promote lung expansion while removal of the balloon before delivery will promote alveolar type II cell maturation. The multicenter prospective randomized Tracheal Occlusion to Accelerate Lung Growth (TOTAL) study results had inclusion criteria of gestational age less than 29 weeks 6 days at randomization, isolated left-­sided CDH with no other major struc- tural or chromosomal defects, and severe pulmonary hypoplasia defined as observed-­to-­expected lung-­to-­head ratios of less than 25%. Forty per- cent of infants with severe CDH in the FETO group survived to discharge compared to 15% in the expectant care group, with survival to 6 months identical to survival at discharge and increased rate of preterm rupture of membranes (47% vs 11%) and preterm birth (75% vs 29%). CONGENITAL PULMONARY AIRWAY MALFORMATION Congenital pulmonary airway malformations (CPAM), or fetal lung lesions, are a group of rare congenital pulmonary neoplasms including congenital cystic adenomatoid malformations (CCAMs), bronchopul- monary sequestrations (BPSs), congenital lobar emphysema, and bron- chogenic cysts (Fig. 118.5). The reported incidence of CPAM is 9 per 100,000 live births, with prenatal diagnosis by fetal US most commonly coinciding with the 18–20-­week anatomy scan. CCAMs are caused by abnormal branching and hamartomatous growth of the terminal respira- tory structures, resulting in cystic and adenomatoid malformations (see Chapter 444), and are the most common congenital lung lesion. CCAMs Fig. 118.3  Creation of a fetal vesicostomy. The uterine opening is sta- pled to prevent bleeding, and a catheter is inserted to replace amniotic fluid and maintain uterine volume. The fetus is positioned with the legs to the lower part of the field and the umbilical cord to the upper part of the field. A vesicostomy is created through the bladder and the ab- dominal wall to allow drainage of the obstructed bladder and restora- tion of amniotic fluid volume. (Courtesy Dr. Foong Lim, Cincinnati Fetal Center at Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center.) Perfusion scope Ultrasound Balloon inflated Balloon detached Fig. 118.4  Technique for fetoscopic tracheal occlusion using a bal- loon. (Modified from Hirose S, Harrison MR. Fetal therapy. In Holcomb GW III, Murphy JP, eds. Ashcraft’s Pediatric Surgery. 5th ed. St Louis: Elsevier; 2010. Fig. 10.1.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1032  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant have been classified as microcystic (maximal cyst diameter <5 mm) vs macrocystic (≥5 mm), and prognosis is correlated with lesion size as well as presence of macrocysts (see Fig. 118.5). In contrast, BPSs appear as echogenic homogeneous masses on US and can be distinguished from CCAM by US evidence of systemic aortic arterial blood supply. Large CPAMs may cause significant pulmonary hypoplasia and polyhydramnios due to decreased fetal swallowing secondary to esophageal compression. In severe cases, hydrops fetalis may result due to compression of the heart and great vessels. Hydrops with concomi- tant placentomegaly may result in maternal mirror syndrome, which is postulated to result from the release of vasoactive substances from the inflamed and edematous placenta. Due to the variable natural history of these lesions, a prenatal prognostic parameter, the CPAM volume ratio (CVR), is followed. The CVR is an index that compares the volume of the CPAM to the fetal head circumference. Most studies indicate >95% survival in CPAM patients with no hydrops and CVR <1.6, with greater risk for hydrops and need for closer surveillance in patients with a CVR >1.6. Management of pregnancies complicated by prenatal diagnosis of a fetal lung lesion requires a plan for safe delivery. In the absence of medias- tinal shift or flattening, small microcystic lesions will typically meet crite- ria for community delivery with a plan for close postnatal follow-­up. Due to the risk of recurrent infection and malignant transformation, elective postnatal resection is anticipated; a CT angiogram (CTA) is performed at 4-­6 weeks of age with surgical intervention following a few weeks later, when the potential for compensatory growth of the remaining lobe(s) is maximized. In the example of large macrocystic lesions with concern for respiratory compromise, delivery at an experienced center with access to ECMO and advanced emergent resection approaches is critical. For large lesions with CVR >1.6 or associated hydrops, the presence of mac- rocysts permits fetal thoracentesis and eventual thoracoamniotic shunt placement, which may reverse hydrops and allow continuation of the pregnancy without open fetal surgical intervention. Irrespective of the presence of drainable cysts, large lesions with threatened hydrops are treated with maternal betamethasone, which has been shown to reduce lesion size and reverse hydrops and may be given in multiple courses Normal Heart and Lung Anatomy with Lobes of Lungs • • • • • • Right upper lobe Left upper lobe Right middle lobe Right lower lobe Left lower lobe Heart • • Small microcystic CCAM/CPAM in left upper lobe Heart in normal position • • Large Microcystic CCAM/CPAM, Heart Compressed • • Large Macrocystic CCAM/CPAM, Heart Compressed Large microcystic CCAM/CPAM in left lower lobe Heart compressed Large macrocystic CCAM/CPAM in lower left lobe Heart compressed • • • • • • Right upper lobe Left upper lobe Right middle lobe Right lower lobe Left lower lobe Heart • • Small Microcystic CCAM/CPAM, Heart Not Compressed Small microcystic CCAM/CPAM in left upper lobe Heart in normal position • • Large Microcystic CCAM/CPAM, Heart Compressed • • Large Macrocystic CCAM/CPAM, Heart Compressed Large microcystic CCAM/CPAM in left lower lobe Heart compressed Large macrocystic CCAM/CPAM in lower left lobe Heart compressed Fig. 118.5  Different types of congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation (CCAM)/congenital pulmonary airway malformation (CPAM), and how the different sizes and presentations of lung lesions can impact the heart and lungs. (Copyright 2021, The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 118  u  Fetal Intervention and Surgery  1033 A B Fig. 118.6  A, Ultrafast MRI of fetus with giant cervical teratoma showing polyhydramnios and hyperextension of the neck. B, Fetus with giant cervical teratoma at the time of intubation by direct laryngoscopy and rigid bronchoscopy. (From Lazar DA, Olutoye OO, Moise KJ, et al. Ex-­utero intrapartum treatment procedure for giant neck masses – fetal and maternal outcomes. J Pediatr Surg. 2011;46:817–822, Fig. 1.) to maximize therapeutic impact. Lesions not responsive to steroids or amenable to drainage may require open fetal surgery if the gestational age is less than 32 weeks; beyond 32 weeks’ gestation, early delivery by C-­section or ex utero intrapartum therapy (EXIT) with planned imme- diate resection is recommended. CONGENITAL HIGH AIRWAY OBSTRUCTION SYNDROME Congenital high airway obstruction syndrome (CHAOS) is secondary to partial or complete intrinsic fetal upper airway obstruction. Most often due to laryngeal or tracheal atresia, CHAOS prevents lung fluid efflux resulting in dilated distal pulmonary airways and enlargement of the fetal lungs with potential for cardiac compression and the development of fetal hydrops. The diagnosis is confirmed by fetal MRI (Fig. 118.6). In addition to CHAOS, extrinsic compression of the airway may be secondary to mass lesions (lymphangioma, teratoma, goiter) making respiratory efforts after birth difficult. EXIT (ex utero intrapartum treatment) is a procedure to secure an airway during elective delivery (while the umbilical cord is pat- ent and connected to the placenta), by C-­section, before the onset of labor and before the fetus attempts to breathe (Fig. 118.7). The EXIT to airway procedure may be performed by direct laryngoscopy and Indications for EXIT-to-Airway Intrinsic airway obstruction CHAOS Rigid bronchoscopy Rigid bronchoscopy Orotracheal intubation Formal tracheostomy Formal tracheostomy Laryngeal web or cyst EXIT complete No No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Additional maneuvers Elevate mass off the airway Release neck strap muscles Partially resect mass Tracheotomy with retrograde intubation Bronchoscopy-guided decompression or excision Laryngeal or tracheal atresia Direct laryngoscopy Extrinsic Airway Compression Cervical or oropharyngeal teratoma, lymphatic malformation, epulis Severe Micrognathia Jaw Index <5th percentile Fig. 118.7  Fetal airway management algorithm for ex utero intrapartum therapy (EXIT) procedures. Yes, Successful; No, not successful; CHAOS, congenital high airway obstruction syndrome. (Adapted from Chatterjee D, Crombleholme TM. Airway management in EXIT procedures. In Jagan- nathan N, Fiadjoe JE, eds. Management of the Difficult Pediatric Airway. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press; 2020.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1034  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant A B Fig. 118.8  A, Exposure of 26-­week fetus through hysterotomy revealing sacrococcygeal teratoma (SCT). B, Closure of skin flaps after resection. (Copyright 2021, The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia.) endotracheal intubation or, if needed, rigid bronchoscopy, fiberoptic intubation, or tracheostomy (see Fig. 118.6). SACROCOCCYGEAL TERATOMA Sacrococcygeal teratoma (SCT) is one of the most common solid tumors of the newborn, with an incidence of 4.8 per 100,000 live births. This germline tumor has a female predominance (4:1) and is rarely associated with other congenital anomalies including nervous, skeletal, and cardiac abnormalities. The high morbidity and mortality associated with SCT is multi- factorial and is associated with both high rates of preterm delivery as well as hemodynamic sequelae. The mechanism of preterm deliv- ery in SCT is believed to be a result of polyhydramnios-­associated uterine irritability and premature rupture of membranes. Rupture of the tumor itself is rare but is most often fatal. The vascular com- position of the tumor has hemodynamic implications for the fetus/ newborn as high-­output cardiac failure results from arteriovenous shunting causing vascular steal away from the placenta and the fetus to the SCT and compromised perfusion. Hydropic fetuses with placentomegaly may develop maternal mirror syndrome mandat- ing immediate delivery. Prenatal diagnosis relies on US to identify the lesion and subsequent fetal MRI and echocardiography to assess for placental size, hydrops, and cardiac output physiology. Specific echocardiographic and Doppler US measurements of prognos- tic utility include cardiac output, cardiac/thoracic ratio, placental thickness, amniotic fluid index, and markers of hydrops including ascites as well as skin and scalp edema. Given the morbidity and mortality associated with open fetal resection, prenatal intervention is limited to fetuses with mostly external masses manifesting hydrops and fetal cardiac insufficiency. The fetal approach to SCT debulking involves incision of the fetal skin circumferentially around the base of the tumor, application of a Rummel tourniquet, and debulking of the mass with a tissue stapler or energy device to interrupt the high output state (Fig. 118.8). Com- pletion resection of the tumor and coccyx is performed postnatally. More often in the setting of early signs of evolving hydrops in the third trimester, early delivery (28-­29 weeks’ gestation) and debulking are considered with a similar strategy of staged debulking followed by completion resection when the neonate has stabilized. Resection of the coccyx is critical to avoid recurrence. Reports of noninvasive interruption of blood flow with laser ablation, radiofrequency ablation, or vascular coiling are tempting but have been complicated by the inability to control the energy source leading to destructive tissue injury and injury to adjacent structures. MYELOMENINGOCELE Myelomeningocele (MMC) is the most common neural tube defect with an incidence of 1-­2 per 1,000 live births. The disease is char- acterized by an abnormal outgrowth of the nerve root through the meninges with a concomitant vertebral bone and skin defect resulting in neural tissue exposure to the amniotic fluid. Associated defects include Chiari II malformation, characterized by descent of the cerebellar vermis through the foramen magnum, medullary kinking, and obliteration of the cistern magna leading to brainstem herniation. Hydrocephalus complicates up to 85% of MMC patients and is a major source of long-­term morbidity, with high rates of shunting of cerebrospinal fluid required in survivors. Dermoid cysts are also common and may require intervention. Developmen- tal and cognitive impairment is prevalent and profound, and cur- rent estimates suggest rates between 60% and 70% of pregnancies complicated by a prenatal diagnosis of MMC end in termination or demise. The etiology of MMC is likely multifactorial, with folic acid deficiency as well as use of folic acid antagonists associated with the development of neural tube defects. Screening for neural tube defects includes measurement of maternal serum α-­fetoprotein (MSAFP) and US. Expectant mothers with screening concerns for MMC should be evaluated at a specialized center with further ana- tomic US, genetic screening, and ultrafast fetal MRI. In addition to identification of the neural tube defect, expert US can assess lower extremity function, and fetal MRI can define the extent of hind- brain herniation and ventricular size. Before the introduction of fetal repair of MMC, fetal surgery was limited to life-­threatening anomalies with high predictive mortal- ity for the fetus or infant without intervention. However, a grow- ing body of data suggested that the neurologic outcome in MMC was directly related to progressive injury from ongoing damage to the exposed spinal cord during pregnancy (see Chapter 631.3) (Fig. 118.9). A large multicenter National Institutes of Health–sponsored Management of Myelomeningocele Study (MOMS) comparing the safety and efficacy of prenatal repair of MMC with that of standard postnatal repair was performed and determined a clear advantage for prenatal surgery before 26 weeks’ gestation. The MOMS trial demonstrated a significant reduction in the need for ventriculo- peritoneal (VP) shunt at 12 months in the fetal repair group (40% vs 82% in postnatal repair group) with reduced hindbrain hernia- tion and improved mental development and motor function at 30 months. Furthermore, the need for shunting was independent of lesion level and degree of hindbrain herniation. The 1-­year neu- rosurgical outcomes for the complete cohort showed that prenatal surgery did not decrease the need for shunting in those fetuses with a cerebral ventricular size of ≥15 mm at initial screening. Prenatal surgery was associated with an increased risk for earlier gestational age at birth. Delivery occurred before 30 weeks of gestation in 11% of neonates that had fetal MMC repair. Adverse pulmonary sequelae were rare in the prenatal surgery group despite an increased rate of oligohydramnios. The benefits of prenatal surgery outweigh the complications of prematurity. Open fetal repair of MMC has been a paradigm-­shifting advance in fetal surgery and has led to the formation of the North American Fetal Therapy Network (NAFTNet) registry of fetal MMC patients, with follow-­up studies continuing to demonstrate the benefits Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 118  u  Fetal Intervention and Surgery  1035 with polyhydramnios and can be done serially to help prevent pre- term later. Endoscopic or fetoscopic laser ablation of the superficial vascular anastomoses is another therapeutic option. Under local or regional anesthesia, a trocar is placed under US guidance and an endoscope passed, through which superficial anastomoses are then identified and coagulated, followed by amnioreduction. The procedure is performed only once during the pregnancy, usually prior to 26 weeks. Several observational studies have noted peri- natal survival approximating 60% with both amnioreduction and laser coagulation. A multicenter randomized trial demonstrated a survival and neurologic advantage after laser coagulation therapy vs amnioreduction; although after 26 weeks, amnioreduction is often still recommended for technical reasons. Other surgical ther- apies include septostomy (disrupting the membrane between the twins) and selective umbilical cord coagulation in severe cases. Like amnioreduction, septostomy does not alter the underlying patho- physiology. All cases should be referred to tertiary care centers with extensive experience in the treatment of TTTS. OTHER INDICATIONS Antenatal intervention for cardiac defects, such as aortic stenosis, pulmonic stenosis, and hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS), have been used to dilate, with balloon valvuloplasty, stenotic valves (aortic stenosis) to prevent further development of HLHS (creating biventric- ular physiology) (Fig. 118.11) (see Chapter 480.10). Laser therapy has been used to treat TTTS (Chapter 119.1) and amniotic bands (Fig. 118.12). FETAL CENTERS The value of fetal surgical program centers extends beyond fetal intervention itself. Often, families will present to a fetal center with a new diagnosis and little understanding of the implications for their baby and family. Prenatal counseling by the fetal team provides the opportunity to confirm the diagnosis, investigate for other anomalies and genetic susceptibilities, and provide detailed counseling to achieve understanding of both the diagnosis and Fig. 118.9  Open fetal myelomeningocele repair. (From Hirose S, Har- rison MR. Fetal therapy. In Holcomb GW III, Murphy JP, eds. Ashcraft’s Pediatric Surgery. 5th ed. St Louis: Elsevier; 2010. Fig. 10-­5.) Fig. 118.10  In twin-­to-­twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS), blood flow through vascular connections on the surface of the placenta is unequal. One twin (“donor twin”) pumps blood to the other twin (“recipient”). This unequal blood flow between twins results in the recipient twin (right) hav- ing too much amniotic fluid, and donor twin (left) with little or no amniotic fluid. (Copyright 2021, The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia.) observed in the MOMS trial in subsequent series. The risk of pre- maturity and requirement for cesarean section deliveries for all future pregnancies remain significant considerations for this pro- cedure. The less invasive fetoscopic MMC repair approach, which is being developed at a limited number of centers, may reduce mater- nal morbidity and prematurity rates associated with open fetal MMC repair, but this remains a question of active ongoing investi- gation. At this time, fetoscopic fetal MMC repair is recommended in an investigational setting according to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and the Society for Maternal-­Fetal Medicine. TWIN-­TO-­TWIN TRANSFUSION SYNDROME Twin-­to-­twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS) is a condition that affects approximately 10–15% of monochorionic diamniotic identi- cal twin pregnancies. In these cases, shared fetoplacental circulation can lead to unbalanced blood flow between the two fetuses which, left untreated, results in perinatal loss of one or both fetuses in approximately 80% of cases (Fig. 118.10). Unlike dichorionic twins, which do not have any vascular connections between the placentas, monochorionic twins have vascular anastomoses within the shared fetoplacental circulation. Unbalanced deep arteriovenous anasto- moses without proper compensation from the superficial bidirec- tional vessels results in discordant blood supply, with the “donor” fetus presenting with oligohydramnios and intrauterine growth restriction while the “recipient” fetus develops polyhydramnios, heart failure, and hydrops due to hypervolemia. Neurodevelopmen- tal delay is commonly observed in long-­term survivors. TTTS is usually a gradual process that is usually observed in the sec- ond trimester. Diagnosis is performed via US in the second trimester. The Quintero classification system is used to stratify TTTS into five stages. • Stage I: Abnormal amniotic fluid levels (oligo-­ and polyhydramnios) with bladder filling in the donor twin • Stage II: Features of stage I with collapsed bladder in the donor twin • Stage III: New abnormal flow through the umbilical artery or ductus venosus in either the donor or recipient twin with stage II features present • Stage IV: Hydrops in either the donor or recipient twin • Stage V: Intrauterine demise of either the donor or recipient twin Several therapies have been proposed for the treatment of TTTS. Amnioreduction is performed to remove excess fluid from the sac Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1036  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant A B © UZ Leuven Fig. 118.11  A, Ultrasound image (right panel) is a cross section at the level of the fetal chest, demonstrating the four-­chamber view in a fetus with aortic stenosis. Notice that the left ventricle (arrowhead) is dilated. Dilation occurs before the development of hypoplasia, which can be seen (arrowhead) in another fetus (left panel). B, Schematic representation of percutaneous valvuloplasty, in this case of the left ventricular outlet tract. (A from van Mieghem T, Baud D, Devlieger R, et al. Minimally invasive fetal therapy. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol 2012;26:711–725; B copyright UZ Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.) H A D F E H C B UE 1 A OPP HEEL G H I ** Fig. 118.12  Amniotic band sequence in two different fetuses. A and B, Effects on the extremities. Limbs of a fetus with amniotic band sequence show multiple amniotic bands (short arrows, A and B), amputation of fingers and toes (long arrows, A and B), and a fixed deformity of the hand at the wrist (arrowhead, B). C and D, Effects on the thorax and abdomen of the same fetus as in A and B. Sagittal image (C) shows a thoracoabdominal wall defect (arrows) with a large amount of herniated abdominal and thoracic contents (asterisk) outside the body. White H, Head. D, Axial image of the fetal abdomen (A) confirms the presence of a large ventral abdominal hernia (H), in the setting of amniotic bands (arrow). E to G, Effects on crani- ofacial structures in a different fetus. E, Coronal image of face shows multiple amniotic bands (short arrows) and nonvisualization of the calvarium. This results in a craniofacial appearance that resembles anencephaly (long arrow). F, A large encephalocele (black arrow) is seen above the level of the orbits (long white arrow) in a different scan plane. An amniotic band (short white arrow) is also seen. G, Coronal image of anterior portion of face shows facial clefts (black arrows) due to amniotic bands. Short white arrow, Amniotic band; long white arrow, orbits. H, Band constricting the ankle, leading to deformational defects. I, Pseudosyndactyly, amputation, and disruption of finger morphogenesis. (A-­G from Hertzberg BS, Middleton WD. Ultrasound: The Requisites. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016. Figs. 19-­22; H and I from Jones KL, Smith DW, Hall BD, et al. A pattern of craniofacial and limb defects secondary to aberrant tissue bands. J Pediatr. 1974;84:90–95.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 118  u  Fetal Intervention and Surgery  1037 Table 118.3     Selection of Patients for Fetal Repair LEVEL OF CERTAINTY DIAGNOSIS DIAGNOSTIC CERTAINTY/PROGNOSTIC CERTAINTY Genetic problems Trisomy 13, 15, or 18 Triploidy Central nervous system abnormalities Anencephaly/acrania Holoprosencephaly Large encephaloceles Heart problems Acardia Inoperable heart anomalies Kidney problems Potter syndrome/renal agenesis Multicystic/dysplastic kidneys Polycystic kidney disease DIAGNOSTIC UNCERTAINTY/PROGNOSTIC CERTAINTY Genetic problems Thanatophoric dwarfism or lethal forms of osteogenesis imperfecta Early oligo/anhydramnios and pulmonary hypoplasia Potter syndrome with unknown etiology Central nervous system abnormalities Hydranencephaly Congenital severe hydrocephalus with absent or minimal brain growth Prematurity <23 weeks’ gestation PROGNOSTIC UNCERTAINTY/BEST INTEREST Genetic problems Errors of metabolism that are expected to be lethal even with available therapy Mid oligo/anhydramnios Renal failure requiring dialysis Central nervous system abnormalities Complex or severe cases of meningomyelocele Neurodegenerative diseases, such as spinal muscular atrophy Heart problems Some cases of hypoplastic left heart syndrome Pentalogy of Cantrell (ectopia cordis) Other structural anomalies Some cases of giant omphalocele Severe congenital diaphragmatic hernia with hypoplastic lungs Idiopathic nonimmune hydrops Inoperable conjoined twins Multiple severe anomalies Prematurity 23-­24 weeks’ gestation From Leuthner SR. Fetal palliative care. Clin Perinatol 2004;31:649–665. Table 1. all available treatment options. This collaborative and multidisci- plinary family-­centered approach allows for the development of a management plan that may include fetal surgery or intervention, enhanced monitoring of the fetus and mother, and coordination of complex deliveries involving multidisciplinary delivery teams and specialized equipment as required for EXIT to ECMO, EXIT to air- way, EXIT to tumor resection, delivery to cardiac catheterization, and procedures on placental support. In some highly specialized fetal centers, delivery may be facilitated with the neonatal intensivists, perinatal anesthesiologist, and pediat- ric surgical care teams present in the same location to permit expert stabilization and resuscitation of the neonate. The benefits range from the psychological benefits of avoiding maternal-­infant separation as well as improved outcomes in diagnoses such as CDH, in which early stabilization of the neonate is critical to minimize pulmonary hyper- tensive crisis. Finally, but equally importantly, not all severely affected fetuses will have available therapies in utero or after birth. In these lethal situations, fetal care planning will provide support for the family and a plan for delivery room or nursery palliative care (Table 118.3) (see Chapter 8). Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1038  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant The term high-­risk infant designates an infant at greater risk for neona- tal morbidity and mortality; many factors can contribute to an infant being high risk (Table 119.1). There are four broad categories of high-­ risk infants: the preterm infant, infants with special healthcare needs or dependence on technology, infants at risk because of family issues, and infants with anticipated early death. All high-­risk infants require closer evaluation and/or treatment by experienced physicians and nurses. This often starts before delivery and continues in the delivery room and through a neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) stay (see Chapter 121). Regionalized care for infants is based on the acuity of care that can be provided at hospitals with different levels of care and whether transport should be undertaken (see Chapter 120). It is important to note that additional care does not stop at time of NICU discharge, and that many high-­risk infants also benefit from additional resources and follow-­up after discharge from the hospital (see Chapter 119.5). Twins and higher-­order multiples are at increased risk for morbid- ity and mortality and are discussed in Chapter 119.1, whereas other infants deemed high risk are discussed throughout this textbook. Pre- term infants comprise the majority of high-­risk infants. Approximately 15 million infants are born preterm (before 37 weeks’ gestational age) each year worldwide, accounting for about 1 in every 10 babies born. The World Health Organization (WHO) defines infants born before 28 weeks’ gestational age as extremely preterm infants, infants born between 28 and 31 6/7 weeks as very preterm (see Chapter 119.2), and infants born between 32 and 36 6/7 weeks as moderate to late preterm infants (see Chapter 119.3). Risk of both morbidity and mortality increases with earlier gestational age. Gestational age, birthweight, and gender are all important factors that impact neonatal mortality (Fig. 119.1). The highest risk of neonatal and infant mortality occurs in infants with birthweight <1,000 g and/or with gestational age <28 weeks. The lowest risk of neonatal mortality occurs in infants with birthweight of 3,000-­ 4,000 g and a gestational age of 39-­41 weeks. As birthweight increases Chapter 119 The High-­Risk Infant Erik Brandsma, Lori A. Christ, and Andrea F. Duncan Table 119.1     Factors in Considering Infants as High Risk for Morbidity or Mortality in the Neonatal Period BIRTH PARENT DEMOGRAPHIC FACTORS Maternal age <16 yr or >40 yr Environmental, economic, social disadvantage, racial discrimination BIRTH PARENT MEDICAL HISTORY Genetic disorders Diabetes mellitus Hypertension Asymptomatic bacteriuria Rheumatologic illness (systemic lupus erythematosus) Immune-­mediated diseases Long-­term medication (see Chapters 117.4 and 117.5) PREVIOUS PREGNANCY Intrauterine fetal demise Neonatal death Prematurity Intrauterine growth restriction Congenital malformation Incompetent cervix Blood group sensitization, neonatal jaundice Neonatal thrombocytopenia Hydrops Inborn errors of metabolism PRESENT PREGNANCY Vaginal bleeding (abruptio placentae, placenta previa) Sexually transmitted infections (colonization: herpes simplex, group B streptococcus, chlamydia, syphilis, hepatitis B, HIV) Multiple gestation Preeclampsia Premature rupture of membranes Short interpregnancy time Poly-­/oligohydramnios Acute medical or surgical illness Familial or acquired hypercoagulable states Abnormal fetal ultrasonographic findings Treatment of infertility Inadequate prenatal care Substance use disorder LABOR AND DELIVERY Premature labor (<37 wk) Postdates pregnancy (≥42 wk) Fetal distress Breech presentation Meconium-­stained fluid Nuchal cord Cesarean delivery Forceps or vacuum assisted delivery Apgar score <4 at 5 min NEONATE Birthweight <2,500 g or >4,000 g Birth <37 wk or ≥42 wk of gestation Small or large for gestational age Respiratory distress, cyanosis Congenital malformation Pallor, plethora, petechiae B A 98% 95% 90% 75% 50% 25% 3000 2750 2500 2250 2000 1750 1500 1250 1000 750 500 250 0 3000 2750 2500 2250 2000 1750 1500 1250 1000 750 500 250 0 23 33 32 31 30 29 28 Gestation Age (Weeks) 27 26 95% 98% 90% 75% 50% 25% 25 24 23 33 32 31 30 29 28 Birth Weight (g) Birth Weight (g) Gestation Age (Weeks) 27 26 25 24 Fig. 119.1  Contour plot of predicted survival according to gestational age, birthweight, and gender. A, Female. B, Male. The contour lines join combinations of gestational age and birthweight of equal estimat- ed probability of survival. Birthweight percentiles are shown for infor- mation. Data based on singleton infants born in the United Kingdom between January 2008 and December 2010 who survived to NICU ad- mission. (From Manktelow BN, Seaton SE, Fields DJ, et al. Population-­ based estimates of in-­unit survival for very preterm infants. Pediatrics. 2013;131:e425e432. Fig. 2.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 119  u  The High-­Risk Infant  1039 from 400 to 3,000 g and gestational age increases from 23 to 39 weeks, a logarithmic decrease in neonatal mortality occurs. Once birthweight exceeds 4,000 g and/or gestational age exceeds 42 weeks, the incidence of neonatal morbidities and mortality increases (see Chapter 119.4). 119.1  Multiple-­Gestation Pregnancies Lori A. Christ CLASSIFICATION OF TWINS Monozygotic vs Dizygotic Twins Traditionally, twins have been classified as either monozygotic (originat- ing from one ovum fertilized by one sperm in a single fertilization event that then results in postzygotic division of the conceptus into two embryos) or dizygotic (originating from two fertilization events each occurring when a single ovum is fertilized by a single sperm). Identifying twins as monozygotic or dizygotic is useful in determining the relative influence of heredity and environment on human development and disease. Detailed blood typing, gene analysis, or tissue (human leukocyte antigen) typing can be used for zygosity testing (an exception being blood typing in cases of chimeric twins, where one or both twins contain distinct cell lines from multiple zygotes). While often referred to as “identical” twins, physical and cognitive differences may still exist between monozygotic twins due to differences in the in utero environment, the mitochondrial genome, in posttranslational gene product modification, or in the epigenetic modifi- cation of nuclear genes in response to environmental factors. Chorionicity and Amnionicity Twins can also be classified by the number of chorions and amnions in the pregnancy. Dizygotic twins largely result in dichorionic, diamniotic pregnancies, although rarely may result in atypical twinning (see later). The chorionicity and amnionicity of monozygotic twins depends on the timing of fission of the zygote. One-­third of monozygotic twins are dichorionic and diamniotic, and result from splitting on embryonic day 1-­3. Monochorionic, diamniotic twins result from splitting on embry- onic day 3-­8, and monochorionic, monoamniotic twins result from split- ting on day 8-­13. Determination of amnionicity and chorionicity are not reliable ways of determining zygosity. An apparently single placenta may be present with either monozygotic or dizygotic twins, but inspection of a dizygotic placenta usually reveals that each twin has a separate chorion that crosses the placenta between the attachments of the cords and two amnions. Separate or fused dichorionic placentas may be disproportion- ate in size, resulting in growth restriction or malformation of the fetus attached to the smaller placenta or the smaller portion of the placenta. Incidence Differences in the incidence of twins worldwide mainly involve dizy- gotic twins, as monozygotic twinning appears to be independent of heritable factors. In 2019 the U.S. final natality report recorded a twin rate of 32.1 per 1,000 live births, which has continued to decline after an all-­time high in 2014. Increases in monozygotic and dizygotic twin- ning had been associated with advanced maternal age (AMA) and the use of assisted reproductive technologies (ARTs). The rate of triplets and higher-­order multiple births was 87.7 per 100,000 live births in the United States and has continued to decline since 1998. The use of single-­embryo transfer in ART has decreased the numbers of triplet births and higher-­order multiples. ETIOLOGY Dizygotic twins result from polyovulation, or the release of more than one ovum at a single ovulation. Polyovular pregnancies are more fre- quent after the second pregnancy, with increasing maternal age, and in families with a history of dizygotic twins. They may result from simul- taneous maturation of multiple ovarian follicles, but follicles contain- ing two ova have also been described as a genetic trait leading to twin pregnancies. Twin-­prone women have higher levels of gonadotropin. Polyovular pregnancies occur in many women treated for infertility with ovarian stimulants such as clomiphene or gonadotropins. The etiology of monozygotic twinning is unknown, but there are two prevailing theories. In the classic fission theory, twinning results from the splitting of a single conceptus, with the timing of splitting resulting in differing amnionicity and chorionicity (i.e., the earlier the fission occurs, the more likely the twins are to be diamniotic dicho- rionic) (Fig. 119.2). However, this theory fails to account for several forms of atypical twinning, including the occurrence of diamniotic dichorionic monozygotic twinning after single-­embryo transfer in the Fig. 119.2  Classical fission theory of twinning. Dizy- gotic twins result from two distinct fertilization events, with dichorionic diamniotic twins each developing to become a genetically distinct individual. Monozygotic twins result from postzygotic splitting of the product of a single fertilization event. Splitting on days 1-­3 (up to the morula stage) results in dichorionic diamniotic twins, on days 3-­8 (during which blastocyst hatching occurs) in monochorionic diamniotic twins, on days 8-­13 in mono- chorionic monoamniotic twins. (Illustration copyright LeventEfe, CMI. www.leventefe.com.au.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1040  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant late blastocyst state, phenotypically discordant monozygotic twins, and asymmetrically attached conjoined twins. An alternate fusion theory of twinning has been proposed to account for this discrepancy, in which the inner cell masses of trophectoderm fuse after the initial two-­ cell splitting stage (Fig. 119.3). Atypical Twinning Conjoined twins occur in 1 in 50,000 pregnancies and 1 in 250,000 live births. Theoretically, they result from later fission of a single zygote (10-­14 days) or from fusion of two zygotes (as proposed for asymmetrically attached conjoined twins). Most conjoined twins are female. The prognosis for symmetrically conjoined twins depends on the possibility of surgical separation, which in turn depends on the extent to which vital organs are shared. The site of connections varies, as follows: thoracoomphalopagus (28% of conjoined twins), thoracop- agus (18%), omphalopagus (10%), craniopagus (6%), and incomplete duplication (10%). The term parasitic twin has historically been used to describe the smaller and less completely developed member of a pair of conjoined twins; this twin has typically had embryonic demise but remains vascularized by the surviving independent twin (the auto- cyte). For asymmetrically attached conjoined twins in whom one twin is dependent on the cardiovascular system of the intact autocyte (exoparasitic twins, 1 in 1 million live births) survival of the autocyte depends on the feasibility of excising the exoparasitic twin. For endo- parasitic twins (fetus in fetu, 1 in 500,000 live births) in whom one (or more) fetus exists as a benign mass in the autocyte, survival of the autocyte is unaffected. Superfecundation, or fertilization of an ovum by an insemination that takes place after one ovum has already been fertilized, and superfetation, or fertilization and subsequent develop- ment of an embryo when a fetus is already present in the uterus, have been proposed as explanations for differences in size and appearance of certain twins at birth. Diagnosis A prenatal diagnosis of pregnancy with twins is suggested by a uterine size that is greater than that expected for gestational age, auscultation of two fetal heartbeats, and/or elevated maternal serum α-­fetoprotein (AFP) or human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) levels. It is confirmed by ultrasonography. Physical examination of twins is necessary but not sufficient to determine zygosity of twins. In the event that congenital anomalies are present or there are transfusion or transplantation con- siderations, genetic testing of zygosity should be performed. Although noninvasive prenatal testing (NIPT) is becoming more common, the results should be interpreted with caution in multiple-­gestation preg- nancies until normative values are better established. Complications Twin and higher-­order pregnancies are associated with poorer neo- natal and perinatal outcomes compared with singleton pregnancies of the same gestation. Severe maternal morbidities and death are also Fig. 119.3  Fusion theory of monozygotic twinning. Splitting occurs at the postzygotic two-­cell stage, with each cell forming a distinct individual. If twin blastocysts hatch from the zona pellucida together, dichorionic di- amniotic twins will result. If the two trophectoderms fuse before hatching and the inner cell masses are separated within the shared trophectoderm, monochorionic diam- niotic twins will result. If the inner cell masses are fused and separated later, monochorionic monoamniotic twins will result. (Illustration copyright LeventEfe, CMI. www.leventefe.com.au) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 119  u  The High-­Risk Infant  1041 twice as likely in twin pregnancies worldwide compared with singleton pregnancies. Most twins are born prematurely, which contributes to additional neonatal and childhood morbidity and mortality. Spontaneous single intrauterine demise occurs at a rate of about 6% of all twin pregnan- cies. Twin-­twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS) and early-­onset dis- cordant growth are associated with an overall worse prognosis (see Chapter 118). The perinatal mortality of twins is about four times that of singletons, with monochorionic twins being particularly at risk. Monochorionic twins have an increased risk of a demised twin in utero. The surviving twin has a greater risk for cerebral palsy and other neurodevelopmental sequelae. Monoamniotic twins have an increased likelihood of cord entanglement, which may lead to asphyxia. Twins are at greater risk for congenital malformations, with up to 25% of monozygotic twins being affected. Theoretically, the twin delivered second is at higher risk of anoxia than the first because the placenta may separate after birth of the first twin and before birth of the second. In addition, delivery of the second twin may be dif- ficult because it may be in an abnormal presentation (breech, entan- gled), uterine tone may be decreased, or the cervix may begin to close after the first twin’s birth. Triplet or higher-­order births are associated with an increased risk of death or neurodevelopmental impairment compared with extremely low birthweight (ELBW) singleton and twin infants after controlling for gestational age. The mortality for multiple gestations with ≥4 fetuses is excessively high for each fetus. Because of this poor prognosis, selec- tive fetal reduction has been offered as a treatment option. Twin-­Twin Transfusion Syndromes Placental vascular anastomoses occur with high frequency in mono- chorionic twins (see Chapter 118). In monochorionic placentas, the fetal vasculature is usually joined, sometimes in a very complex man- ner. They are usually balanced and neither twin is appreciably affected. Artery-­to-­artery communications cross over placental veins, and when anastomoses are present, blood can readily be stroked from one fetal vascular bed to the other. Vein-­to-­vein communications are similarly recognized but are less common. A combination of artery-­to-­artery and vein-­to-­vein anastomoses is associated with the condition of acar- diac fetus. This rare lethal anomaly (1 in 35,000) is secondary to the twin reversed arterial perfusion (TRAP) syndrome. In utero radio- frequency or laser ablation of the anastomosis or cord occlusion can be used to treat heart failure in the surviving twin. However, death of the autocyte is reported in up to 75% of cases. In rare cases, one umbilical cord may arise from the other after leaving the placenta, and the twin attached to the secondary cord usually is malformed or dies in utero. In twin-­twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS), an artery from one twin acutely or chronically delivers blood that is drained into the vein of the other. The latter develops polyhydramnios and polycythemia, and the former has oligohydramnios, anemia, and growth restriction (Fig. 119.4). TTTS is more common in monozygotic twins and affects up to 30% of monochorionic twins. Death of the donor twin in utero may result in generalized fibrin thrombi in the smaller arterioles of the recipient twin, possibly as the result of transfusion of thromboplastin-­ rich blood from the macerating donor fetus. Disseminated intravascu- lar coagulation (DIC) may develop in the surviving twin. Table 119.2 lists the more frequent changes associated with a large shunt. Preterm birth and/or death of the surviving twin is also highly likely. Treatment of this highly lethal problem includes aggressive amnioreduction for polyhydramnios, selective twin termination, and most often, laser or fetoscopic ablation of anastomosis (Fig. 119.5). Fig. 119.4  Representation of first-­trimester risk as- sessment for the development of discordant growth, twin-­twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS), or intrauterine demise. Discordant amniotic fluid in the first trimester generally corresponded with deepest vertical pockets ≤3 cm in one sac and ≥6.5 cm in the other. Discordance in crown-­rump length (CRL) was present if the difference was ≥12 mm. (From Lewi L, Gucciardo L, Van Mieghem T, et  al. Monochorionic diamniotic twin pregnancies: natural history and risk stratification. Fetal Diagn Ther. 2010;27:121–133.) Predicted HIGH risk for adverse outcome 5 cm 1 cm Discordant amniotic fluid OR 3 cm 3 cm Predicted LOW risk for adverse outcome Concordant amniotic fluid 52 mm CRL large-CRL small ≥12 mm 65 mm 80% adverse outcome; 50% survival OR 75 mm CRL large - CRL small <12 mm 73 mm 20% adverse outcome; 93% survival CAL Table 119.2     Characteristic Changes in Monochorionic Twins with Uncompensated Placental Arteriovenous Shunts TWIN ON: ARTERIAL SIDE—DONOR VENOUS SIDE—RECIPIENT Prematurity Prematurity Oligohydramnios Polyhydramnios Intrauterine growth restriction Hydrops Pale Plethoric Anemic Polycythemic Hypovolemic Hypervolemic Hypoglycemic Cardiac hypertrophy Microcardia Myocardial dysfunction Glomeruli small or normal Glomeruli large Tricuspid valve regurgitation Right ventricular outflow obstruction Arterioles thin walled Arterioles thick walled Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1042  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant Management Prenatal detection of a multiple gestation pregnancy enables the obstetrician and pediatrician to anticipate complications. The risk of multiple-­gestation pregnancies due to ART may be reduced by elective single-­embryo transfers. Asymptomatic early cervical dilation may be managed with cerclage, which is 50% effective in preventing delivery before 28 weeks’ gestation. Elective delivery of twins at 37 weeks (or earlier for monochorionic, monoamniotic twins) reduces the com- plication rate for the fetuses and the birth parent. Furthermore, in twin pregnancies between 32 and 39 weeks’ gestation, planned vaginal deliv- ery is preferred if the first twin is in the cephalic presentation. Close observation and attendance by a pediatric team are indicated in the immediate neonatal period so that prompt treatment of asphyxia or fetal transfusion syndrome can be initiated. The decision to perform an immediate blood transfusion in a severely anemic “donor” twin or a partial exchange transfusion of either twin due to anemia in the “donor” or polycythemia in the “recipient” twin must be based on clini- cal judgment. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 119.2  Extremely and Very Preterm Infants Lori A. Christ and Erik Brandsma Traditionally, the delivery date is determined 280 days after the last menstrual period (LMP). However, only 4% of pregnant women deliver at 280 days, and only 70% deliver within 10 days of the esti- mated delivery date. Infants born before 37 weeks from the first day of the LMP are termed premature by WHO. Infants born before 28 weeks’ gestation are extremely preterm, also referred to as extremely low gestational age newborns (ELGANs); whereas infants born between 28 and 31 weeks and 6 days’ gestation are very preterm. Moderate and late pre- term infants (born between 32 and 36 week 6 days’ gestation) are dis- cussed in Chapter 119.3. In addition to classification by gestational age, classification is also based on birthweight. ELBW is used to describe infants with a birth- weight <1,000 g, very low birthweight (VLBW) describes infants 1,000-­1,500 g, and low birthweight (LBW) describes infants <2,500 g at birth. Birthweight, in general, is a proxy for gestational age, but in the cases of intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) and small-­for-­ gestational-­age (SGA) infants, birthweight can sometimes be mis- leading for true gestational age and is an additional risk factor for comorbidities of prematurity (see Chapter 119.4). INCIDENCE Preterm birth, or birth before 37 weeks of gestation, occurs at a rate of approximately 11% worldwide, adding up to a total of 15 million preterm births annually. Significant variations in preterm birthrates exist between countries, with an approximate rate of 10% in the United States. The U.S. preterm birthrate declined 1% in 2020 to 10.09%. Most of this decline is due to a decrease in rate of late preterm births (7.40% of all births in 2020) and in preterm births less than 34 weeks’ gestation (2.70%). These results are reflected in birthweight-­specific categories (Fig. 119.6). Disparities in preterm birthrates continue to exist, ranging from a high of 14.39% of babies born to non-­Hispanic black mothers to a low of 8.72% of babies born to non-­Hispanic Asian mothers. ETIOLOGY The etiology of preterm birth is multifactorial and involves complex interactions between fetal, placental, uterine, and maternal factors. In the setting of maternal or fetal conditions that prompt early delivery, as well as placental and uterine pathology, causes of preterm birth can sometimes be identified (Table 119.3). Most preterm births are sponta- neous without an identifiable cause. AMA, maternal health conditions, history of previous preterm delivery, short interpregnancy interval, and lower socioeconomic status (SES) have all been associated with preterm birth. Racial disparities also exist and can only be partially predicted when factoring in education and income level. Large popu- lation studies have found associations between maternal genetics and epigenetics and preterm birth. Gestational duration and actual preterm birth have been noted with genetic variants in the maternal genome. Many of these genes have roles in regulation of the estrogen receptor, uterine development, maternal nutrition, or vascular reactivity. ASSESSMENT OF GESTATIONAL AGE Ultrasound measurement of fetal crown-­rump length at 11-­14 weeks’ gestation remains the most accurate method of gestational age estima- tion. Estimates based on ultrasound at later gestation are less accurate, but may be improved with newer methods and likely superior to postna- tal assessment. With insufficient prenatal care or discrepancies between birthweight and predicted gestational age at birth, it remains helpful to be able to assess infants for an estimated gestational age. With a careful physical exam, one may be able to distinguish SGA and IUGR infants Fig. 119.5  Color-­dye-­stained twin-­to-­twin transfusion syndrome pla- centa that was treated using the Solomon technique. Blue and green dye are used to stain the arteries, and pink and yellow dye are used to stain the veins. After identification and coagulation of each individual anastomosis, the complete vascular equator is coagulated from one placental margin to the other. (From Slaghekke F, Lopriore E, Lewi L, et al. Fetoscopic laser coagulation of the vascular equator versus selec- tive coagulation for twin-­to-­twin transfusion syndrome: an open-­label randomized controlled trial, Lancet. 2014;383:2144–2150. Fig. 3.) SOURCE: National Center for Health Statistics, National Vital Statistics System, Natality. Percent 0 2 4 6 8 10 2020 2019* 2020 2019 Very low birthweight Moderately low birthweight Low birthweight 8.31 8.24 6.67 5.59 1.09 6.90 1.34 6.93 1.38 6.68 5.62 1.06 All births Singleton births only Fig. 119.6  Total and singleton low birthweight rates: United States, 2019 and 2020. *Numbers do not add to total du to rounding. (From Osterman M, Hamilton B, Martin JA, Driscoll AK, Valenzuela CP. Births: Final Data for 2020. Natl Vital Stat Rep. 2021;70[17]:1–50. Fig. 3.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 119  u  The High-­Risk Infant  1043 from preterm infants. Compared with a premature infant of appropriate weight, an infant with IUGR has a reduced birthweight and may appear to have a disproportionately larger head relative to body size; infants in both groups lack subcutaneous fat. Neurologic maturity (nerve conduc- tion velocity) in the absence of asphyxia correlates with gestational age despite reduced fetal weight. Physical signs may be useful in estimating gestational age at birth. The commonly used Ballard scoring system is accurate to within 2 weeks of actual gestational age (Figs. 119.7-­119.9). NURSERY CARE At birth, the general measures needed to clear the airway, initiate breathing, care for the umbilical cord and eyes, and administer vitamin K are the same for premature infants as for those of normal weight and maturity (see Chapter 123). Additional considerations are the need for (1) thermal control and monitoring of the heart rate and respira- tion, (2) advanced respiratory support, and (3) special attention to the details of fluid requirements and nutrition that may in turn lead to con- siderations of IV access. Preterm infants are at an increased risk of early and late-­onset neonatal sepsis compared with their term counterparts. Routine procedures that disturb these infants may result in hypoxia and stress. The benefits of regular and active participation by the par- ents in the infant’s care in the nursery and the question of prognosis for later growth and development require special consideration. Thermal Control Avoidance of hypothermia and hyperthermia decreases the risk of morbidity and mortality in ELBW and VLBW infants. Neonates in general, and ELBW and VLBW infants to an even greater extent, are at increased risk of heat loss compared with older children due to an Table 119.3     Identifiable Risk Factors for Preterm Birth FETAL Fetal distress Multiple gestation Erythroblastosis Nonimmune hydrops Polyhydramnios PLACENTAL Placental dysfunction Placenta previa Placental abruption UTERINE Bicornuate uterus Incompetent cervix (premature dilation) MATERNAL Previous preterm birth Preeclampsia Experiencing racism Chronic medical illness (cyanotic heart disease, renal disease, thyroid disease) Short interpregnancy interval Infection (Listeria monocytogenes, group B streptococcus, urinary tract infection, bacterial vaginosis, chorioamnionitis) Obesity Substance use disorder Extremes of maternal age OTHER Premature rupture of membranes Polyhydramnios Iatrogenic due to factors listed above Assisted reproductive technology Trauma Skin Sticky, friable, transparent Gelatinous, red, translucent 50 mm, no crease Smooth, pink, visible veins None Heel-toe 40-50 mm:–1 40 mm: –2 Barely perceptible Impercep- tible Sparse 0 Abundant Faint red marks Flat areola– no bud Lids open, pinna flat, stays folded Lids fused loosely (–1), tightly (–2) Slightly curved pinna; soft; slow recoil Creases on ant. 2/3 Superficial peeling and/or rash, few veins Anterior transverse crease only Stripped areola, 1-2 mm bud Thinning 1 2 Cracking, pale areas, rare veins Parchment, deep cracking, no vessels 3 4 Bald areas Mostly bald Leathery, cracked, wrinkled 5 Lanugo Breast Eye/ear Plantar surface Genitals, male Genitals, female Creases over entire sole Raised areola, 3-4 mm bud Full areola, 5-10 mm bud Well-curved pinna, soft but ready recoil Formed and firm, instant recoil Thick cartilage, ear stiff Scrotum empty, faint rugae Scrotum flat, smooth Testes in upper canal, rare rugae Testes descending, few rugae Testes down, good rugae Testes pendulous, deep rugae Prominent clitoris, small labia minora Clitoris prominent, labia flat Prominent clitoris, enlarging minora Majora and minora equally prominent Majora large, minora small Majora cover clitoris and minora 1 Physical maturity Fig. 119.7  Physical criteria for maturity. The expanded New Ballard score includes extremely premature infants and has been refined to im- prove accuracy in more mature infants. (From Ballard JL, Khoury JC, Wedig K, et al. New Ballard score, expanded to include extremely pre- mature infants. J Pediatr. 1991;119:417–423.) 5 4 3 2 1 0 90 180 140-180 110-140 90-110 90 90 90 100 120 140 180 160 60 45 30 0 Posture Neuromuscular maturity Square window (wrist) Arm recoil Popliteal angle Scarf sign Heel to ear 1 90 Fig. 119.8  Neuromuscular criteria for maturity. The expanded New Ballard score includes extremely premature infants and has been re- fined to improve accuracy in more mature infants. (From Ballard JL, Khoury JC, Wedig K, et al. New Ballard score, expanded to include extremely premature infants. J Pediatr. 1991;119:417–423.) Score 0 5 20 30 40 45 Weeks 20 24 26 34 38 40 42 30 32 15 25 Maturity Rating 10 28 44 50 – 10 – 5 35 36 22 Fig. 119.9  Maturity rating. The physical and neurologic scores are added to calculate gestational age. (From Ballard JL, Khoury JC, Wedig K, et al. New Ballard score, expanded to include extremely premature infants. J Pediatr. 1991;119:417–423.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1044  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant increased body surface/weight ratio, decreased epidermal and dermal skin thickness, minimal subcutaneous fat, and an immature nervous system. Preterm infants should be kept in a neutral thermal environment. This environment comprises a set of thermal conditions, including air and radiating surface temperatures, relative humidity, and airflow, at which heat production (measured experimentally as oxygen consump- tion) is minimal and the infant’s core temperature is within the normal range. The neutral thermal environment is a function of the size and postnatal age of an infant; larger, older infants require lower environ- mental temperatures than smaller, younger infants. Incubators or radi- ant warmers can be used to maintain body temperature. Body heat is conserved through provision of a warm environment and humidity, while minimizing heat loss through conduction, convection, radiation, and evaporation. The optimal environmental temperature for minimal heat loss and oxygen consumption for an unclothed infant is one that maintains the infant’s core temperature at 36.5–37.0°C (97.7–98.6°F). The smaller and less mature the infant, the higher is the environmental temperature required. Infant warmth can be maintained by heating the air to a desired temperature or by servo-­control. Continuous monitor- ing of the infant’s temperature is required to maintain optimal body temperature. Kangaroo care, especially in LBW infants, with direct skin-­to-­skin contact between infant and parent, with a hat and blan- ket covering the infant, is to be encouraged (and not delayed), without untoward effects on thermoregulation. Maintaining increased relative humidity for preterm infants in the first weeks of life aids in stabilizing body temperature by reduc- ing heat loss at lower environmental temperatures. The ideal humidity and duration of increased humidity at a specific gestational age is not known, but typically is maintained between 60% and 80% for a week. Humidification of inspired air for infants requiring respiratory sup- port prevents drying and irritation of the lining of respiratory passages and aids in thinning viscid secretions and reducing insensible water loss. Humidification should be gradually weaned after the first week of life to promote skin barrier formation and to reduce the risk of micro- bial growth associated with prolonged excessive humidity. The infant should also be weaned and then removed from the incubator or radi- ant warmer when the gradual change to the atmosphere of the nursery does not result in a significant change in the infant’s temperature, color, activity, vital signs, or rate of weight gain. Oxygen Administration Administering oxygen to reduce the risk of injury from hypoxia and circulatory insufficiency (risk of cerebral palsy, death) must be bal- anced against the risk of hyperoxia to the eyes (retinopathy of prema- turity [ROP]) and injury to the lungs due to generation of free radicals. For ELBW infants at birth, guidelines should be followed to determine need for supplemental oxygen during resuscitation to maintain goal O2 saturation limits (see Chapter 123). After the initial resuscitation period, ideal target O2 saturation lim- its for ELBW infants should be within the range of 90–95% for most infants. Nutrition for the High-­Risk Infant In the absence of early parenteral and enteral nutritional support, defi- cits in protein, energy, and micronutrients will quickly accrue, placing the infant at risk for poor growth and neurodevelopmental outcomes. The goals of early nutritional support for extremely premature infants include approximating the rate and composition of growth for a nor- mal fetus at the same postmenstrual age. Achieving this goal requires an understanding of the intrauterine growth rate to be targeted as well as the unique nutrient requirements of premature infants. Strategies to prevent growth failure include a combined approach of early par- enteral and enteral nutrition, fortification of human milk, and the use of standardized feeding guidelines. Careful monitoring of weight gain, length, and head circumference using appropriate growth curves and timely biochemical assessment of bone health and potential nutritional deficiencies is paramount. Consultation with an experienced neonatal dietitian is important to achieve optimal outcomes. Early Parenteral Nutrition In the absence of IV amino acids, extremely premature infants lose 1–2% of body protein stores per day. IV amino acids and dextrose should be started immediately after birth. Many units use a starter or stock solution of amino acids and dextrose to accomplish this goal in infants weighing <1,500 g. Ideally at least 2 g/kg of amino acids should be given in the first 24 hours after birth, with a goal of at least 3 g/kg within 24-­48 hours after birth. To meet total energy requirements, up to 3 g/kg of IV lipids will also be needed. Benefits of Human Milk Maternal milk is the preferred source of enteral nutrition for premature infants and is associated with decreased in-­hospital morbidity, including lower rates of necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC), late-­onset sepsis, bronchopul- monary dysplasia (BPD), and severe ROP. Maternal milk feeding is also asso- ciated with superior neurodevelopmental outcomes at 18-­ and 30-­months corrected age compared to infants fed premature formula. Donor human milk is increasingly being used when maternal milk is not available, but it is typically lower in protein and energy content than preterm maternal milk and may result in suboptimal growth unless adequately fortified. Although donor human milk has been associated with a reduction in NEC, the impact of donor human milk on neurodevelopmental outcomes remains unclear. Enteral Nutrition Early enteral feedings are recommended in ELBW and VLBW infants, typically beginning between 6 and 48 hours of life with some period of trophic/minimal enteral feeding volume. Feedings are typically advanced slowly (15-­30 mL/kg/day) with a target goal of delivering approximately 110-­135 kcal/kg/day and 3.5-­4.5 g protein/kg/day. To accomplish these goals, human milk must be fortified, or a premature formula can be given. Additional supplements such as vitamins, iron, or other micronutrients may be required and should be based on ongo- ing assessment and in consultation with a neonatal dietitian. Standardized Feeding Guidelines Standardized feeding guidelines should be developed incorporating evidence-­based strategies for the provision of parenteral and enteral nutrition in ELBW and VLBW infants, including a plan to man- age feeding intolerance. Regardless of the specific protocol, having a feeding guideline leads to improved outcomes (e.g., time to regain birthweight, time to reach full enteral nutrition), decreased rates of late-­onset sepsis and NEC, improved growth at 36 weeks’ postmen- strual age, and reduced length of hospital stay. Transitioning to Discharge Nutrition The earlier an infant is born before expected, the greater the likelihood that not all nutritional deficits will be resolved before hospital dis- charge. Regardless of weight gain during the initial hospital stay, there is strong evidence for improved bone mineralization with the use of higher concentrations of calcium and phosphorus after discharge. For- tified human milk or preterm formula with higher concentrations of protein, minerals, and trace elements is often recommended after dis- charge. An individualized approach to postdischarge nutrition should be developed to transition from the NICU and communicated with the outpatient pediatrician who will be caring for the infant. Prevention of Infection Extremely preterm infants have an increased susceptibility to infection; thus meticulous attention to infection control is required. Prevention strategies include strict compliance with handwashing and universal precautions, minimizing the risk of catheter contamination and dura- tion, meticulous skin care, encouraging early appropriate advancement of enteral feeding, education and feedback to staff, and surveillance of nosocomial infection rates in the nursery. Although no one with an active infection should be permitted in the nursery, the risks of infec- tion must be balanced against the disadvantages of limiting the infant’s contact with the family. Early and frequent participation by parents in the nursery care of their infant does not increase the risk of infection when preventive precautions are maintained. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 119  u  The High-­Risk Infant  1045 Preventing transmission of infection from infant to infant is difficult because often neither term nor premature newborn infants have clear clinical evidence of an infection early in their course. When epidem- ics occur within a nursery, cohort nursing and isolation rooms should be used. Hand hygiene is of upmost importance. Because premature infants have immature immune functions, some will develop nosoco- mial infection even when all precautions are followed. Awareness of overutilization of antibiotics may mitigate associated complications both at the population level (cost and antibiotics resis- tance) and for the individual patient (alteration of the microbiome). Routine immunizations should be given on the regular schedule based on chronological age at standard doses. Transfusion Medicine Premature infants are at increased risk of anemia due to impaired erythropoiesis and iatrogenesis due to frequent laboratory sampling. Most infants with a birthweight less than 1,000 g admitted to the NICU receive at least one blood transfusion during their stay. The need for repeated transfusion can be minimized by a thoughtful approach to laboratory sampling and establishing set hemoglobin thresholds for transfusions. A multicenter randomized controlled trial in infants 22 weeks 0 days to 28 weeks 6 days found that a lower transfusion thresh- old resulted in fewer transfusions per infant without an impact on neu- rodevelopment at 22 to 26 months’ corrected gestational age. The need for transfusions depends in part on the cardiopulmonary stability of the patient, postnatal age, birthweight, and the etiology of the anemia. For severe cardiopulmonary disease, transfusions are recommended to maintain the hematocrit between 40% and 45%. For asymptomatic stable neonates with anemia of prematurity, maintaining the hemato- crit at ∼25% is acceptable. Transfusion of platelets is another common practice in the NICU. Premature infants are at high risk for intraventricular hemorrhage in the first week of life, which historically prompted platelet transfusion at thresholds now considered safe. Additionally, preterm infants may also develop thrombocytopenia in the setting of severe bleeding or infection. A multicenter randomized controlled trial found that infants randomized to a higher platelet transfusion threshold (50,000/m3) paradoxically had a higher rate of death or severe bleeding that infants randomized to a lower threshold (25,000/m3). IMMATURITY OF DRUG METABOLISM Great care must be taken when prescribing and dosing medications for premature infants (Table 119.4). Renal clearance of almost all sub- stances excreted in the urine is diminished in newborn infants, and to even a greater extent in premature infants. The glomerular filtration rate rises with increasing gestational age; therefore drug dosing recom- mendations vary with age. For drugs primarily excreted by the kidneys, longer intervals between dosages are often needed with increasing degree of prematurity. Drugs that are detoxified in the liver or require chemical conjugation before renal excretion should also be given with caution and in doses smaller than usual. Many drugs apparently safe for adults on the basis of toxicity stud- ies may be harmful to newborns, especially premature infants. Oxy- gen and a number of drugs have proved toxic to premature infants in amounts not harmful to term infants. Thus, administering any drug, particularly in high doses, that has not undergone pharmacologic test- ing in premature infants should be undertaken carefully after risks have been weighed against benefits. MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY Rates of neonatal morbidity and mortality are high in extremely pre- term infants, and risks increase with decreasing gestational age and lower birthweight (Table 119.5). Data on extremely preterm infants born between 2003 and 2007 found that 42% of VLBW infants devel- oped BPD, 12% developed ROP requiring treatment, 11% NEC, 36% late-­onset sepsis, 16% grade III or IV intraventricular hemorrhage, and 3% periventricular leukomalacia (PVL). Mortality increased with lower gestational age, with a 94% mortality in infants born at 22 weeks and 8% mortality at 28 weeks. The group of extremely preterm infants had a 28% mortality rate, with 37% surviving without a significant neo- natal morbidity. Another study found that morbidity and mortality among VLBW infants decreased between 2000 and 2009. This study was limited to liveborn infants with birthweights of 500-­1,500 g. For infants born in 2009, this study found a 12.4% mortality rate; 28% of infants devel- oped BPD, 7% severe ROP, 5% NEC, 15% late-­onset sepsis, 6% grade III or IV IVH, and 3% PVL; 51% survived without significant neonatal morbidity. Outcomes are improving with time; survival among infants born at 22-­ 24 weeks’ gestation is ∼50–80% in units providing active management. The percentage surviving without neurodevelopmental impairment has also increased. Factors that reduce morbidity and mortality in extremely preterm infants include higher birthweight and gestational age, receipt of antenatal corticosteroids, female sex, singleton pregnancy, and active Table 119.4     Potential Adverse Reactions to Drugs Administered to Premature Infants DRUG REACTION(S) Oxygen Retinopathy of prematurity, bronchopulmonary dysplasia Sulfisoxazole Kernicterus Chloramphenicol Gray baby syndrome—shock, bone marrow suppression Novobiocin Jaundice Hexachlorophene Encephalopathy Benzyl alcohol Acidosis, collapse, intraventricular bleeding Intravenous vitamin E Ascites, shock Phenolic detergents Jaundice NaHCO3 Intraventricular hemorrhage Amphotericin Anuric renal failure, hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia Indomethacin Oliguria, hyponatremia, intestinal perforation Cisapride Prolonged QTc interval Tetracycline Enamel hypoplasia Tolazoline Hypotension, gastrointestinal bleeding Calcium salts Subcutaneous necrosis Aminoglycosides Deafness, renal toxicity Prostaglandins Seizures, diarrhea, apnea, hyperostosis, pyloric stenosis Phenobarbital Altered state, drowsiness Morphine Hypotension, urine retention, withdrawal Pancuronium Edema, hypovolemia, hypotension, tachycardia Iodine antiseptics Hypothyroidism, goiter Fentanyl Seizures, chest wall rigidity, withdrawal Dexamethasone Gastrointestinal bleeding, hypertension, infection, hyperglycemia, cardiomyopathy, reduced growth Furosemide Deafness, hyponatremia, hypokalemia, hypochloremia, nephrocalcinosis, biliary stones Heparin (not low-­dose prophylactic use) Bleeding, intraventricular hemorrhage, thrombocytopenia Erythromycin Pyloric stenosis Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1046  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant resuscitation planned at delivery. With improvement in neonatal care, a growing number of centers offer a trial of resuscitation starting at 22 0/7 weeks if that is consistent with parental goals. Outcome prediction tools such as those based on data from the United States (NICHD-­VON) or UK (BAPM) and the latter organization’s framework to guide manage- ment are resources for the clinician that can be used for parental coun- seling. The prediction tools underscore that extreme prematurity is still associated with significant risk of both mortality and major neonatal morbidities. For infants who survive to discharge, prematurity, as well as neonatal morbidities, put them at increased risk for developmental delays and impairment as they age (see Chapter 119.5). Perinatal centers should develop consensus guidelines regarding an approach to periviable birth to ensure a consistent approach to both maternal and neonatal care. Bal- anced and unbiased antenatal counseling that includes shared decision-­ making between neonatologists, obstetricians, and families is imperative. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 119.3  Moderate and Late Preterm Infants Erik Brandsma Whereas the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG), and the WHO have precise definitions for preterm, term, and postterm births, there has been some debate on defining subcategories of preterm infants. Because outcomes vary widely within broad gestational age range groups, consensus on definitions of subcategories is important. Based on a now widely adopted recommendation from a 2005 National Institutes of Health (NIH) sponsored workshop, infants born at 34 0/7 through 36 6/7 weeks’ gestation are considered late preterm. The WHO defines moderate to late preterm birth as infants born at 32 0/7 through 36 6/7 weeks’ gestation. Therefore most define moderate pre- term infants as those born at 32 0/7 through 33 6/7 weeks’ gestation. The initial effect of the NIH-­sponsored workshop and the resulting 2007 AAP Clinical Report from the Committee on Fetus and Newborn on late preterm infants was encouraging. The report continues to be a resource for pediatricians caring for late preterm infants, listing rec- ommended minimum criteria for their discharge. A 2019 update from the Committee on Fetus and Newborn addresses the concern of the increasing incidence of late preterm birth since 2015. The risk of morbidity in the individual infant born moderate or late preterm is lower than infants born before 32 weeks of gestation. Because late and moderate preterm births account for approximately 75% and 11.5% of preterm births in the United States, respectively, morbidities in this group continue to be a significant burden on the healthcare system. Etiology of preterm birth is discussed elsewhere (see Chapter 117.2). The majority of moderate and late preterm births are associated with spontaneous preterm labor, preterm premature rupture of membranes (PPROM), and multiple gestation. MODERATE PRETERM INFANT Moderate preterm infants are at increased risk for postnatal morbidi- ties, although to a lesser extent and severity than very preterm infants. The most common morbidities associated with preterm birth at this gestational age are temperature instability, respiratory distress, apnea, sepsis, hypoglycemia, feeding difficulties, and hyperbilirubinemia. Moderate preterm infants with birthweight >1,500 g and an unremark- able NICU course are thought to be at minimal risk for IVH and do not routinely need a head ultrasound. Similarly, the AAP does not recommend universal screening for ROP at this gestational age, unless birthweight is below 1,500 g or in select cases for infants with a history of significant cardiopulmonary compromise. Little research has exam- ined moderate preterm infants as an isolated group; more often these infants are grouped with very preterm infants when assessing compli- cations and outcomes. A cohort of approximately 7,000 infants born between 29 and 33 weeks’ gestational age were found in a recent study to have a mean hospital stay of 33.3 days. Moderate and late preterm infants are at increased risk of mortality as well. The increased risk of mortality is modest, approximately 10-­fold for moderate preterm infants and fourfold for late preterm infants compared to term infants (22 and 8.2 per 1,000 live births, respectively), but because these infants comprise close to 90% of preterm infants overall, this group as a whole contributes significantly to infant mortality. LATE PRETERM INFANT As described previously, the overall rate of prematurity has increased gradually since 2015. Most of the increase in overall preterm birthrate can be contributed to infants born late preterm. These infants account for approximately 7.5% of all births and almost three fourths of all pre- term births in the United States. Historically, late preterm infants were referred to as near-­term infants, and the approach to their care was similar to that of term infants. It has been increasingly recognized that late preterm infants have significantly increased morbidity, as well as mortality, compared with their term counterparts. Overall, compared to their term counterparts, late preterm infants have approximately a sevenfold risk of morbidities and fourfold risk of mortality. There is an increased incidence of congenital anomalies in preterm infants, but even when these infants are excluded, late preterm infants continue to have significantly more morbidities. Immediately after birth, there is an increased risk of requiring resuscitation, as well as increased incidence of hypoglycemia, respiratory distress due to respiratory distress syn- drome (RDS) or transient tachypnea of the newborn (TTN) apnea, and Table 119.5     Neonatal Morbidities Associated with Prematurity RESPIRATORY Respiratory distress syndrome (hyaline membrane disease) Bronchopulmonary dysplasia* Pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum; interstitial emphysema Congenital pneumonia Apnea CARDIOVASCULAR Patent ductus arteriosus Hypotension Bradycardia (with apnea) HEMATOLOGIC Anemia (early or late onset) GASTROINTESTINAL Poor gastrointestinal function—poor motility Necrotizing enterocolitis* Hyperbilirubinemia—indirect and direct Spontaneous gastrointestinal isolated perforation METABOLIC-­ENDOCRINE Hypocalcemia Hypoglycemia Hyperglycemia Metabolic acidosis Hypothermia Euthyroid but low thyroxine status Osteopenia CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM Intraventricular hemorrhage* Periventricular leukomalacia* Seizures Retinopathy of prematurity* Deafness RENAL Hyponatremia Hypernatremia Hyperkalemia Renal tubular acidosis Renal glycosuria Edema OTHER Infections* (congenital, perinatal, nosocomial: bacterial, viral, fungal, protozoal) *Major neonatal morbidities. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 119  u  The High-­Risk Infant  1047 difficulty with thermoregulation. Their average birth hospital length of stay is approximately 9 days compared to 2 days for term infants. Addi- tional concerns during this initial hospital stay include feeding difficul- ties and jaundice. They have a higher rehospitalization rate compared to their term peers and an increased risk of long-­term morbidities and even mortality (e.g., sudden infant death syndrome [SIDS]). Some studies suggest a higher risk of lower school readiness at kindergarten and increased risk of academic difficulties in childhood when compar- ing late preterm infants with term peers. In addition to universal routine newborn care, the potential mor- bidities associated with preterm birth need to be addressed. This starts before birth with possible interventions to prevent preterm birth or a course of betamethasone for the pregnant women at risk for preterm birth within 7 days as recommended by ACOG and continues in the delivery room, where measures should be in place to prevent and treat common preterm birth associated morbidities such as hypothermia and hypoglycemia. Whether infants are taken care of in a NICU or in a well-­baby nursery, continued vigilance is required to address the potential consequences of physiologic immaturity, such as poor feed- ing, dehydration, and hyperbilirubinemia. Follow-­up visits should occur early and additional visits may be required to ensure the infant thrives. Because of ongoing health risks that the preterm infant faces in infancy and childhood, awareness and documentation of the child’s birth history is important. It is paramount that all interventions are implemented equitably, with particular attention to non-­Hispanic black and Hispanic women and children, who are currently dispropor- tionally affected by preterm birth and account for the largest increase in late preterm birth. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 119.4  Term and Postterm Infants Andrea F. Duncan The ACOG further divides term infants into subgroups: early term (37-­38 6/7 weeks), full term (39-­40 6/7 weeks), and late term (41-­ 41 6/7 weeks). Many risk factors for term infants put them at higher risk for complications, such as meconium aspiration syndrome (see Chapter 129.1), hemolytic disease of the newborn (see Chapter 140), infant of a diabetic mother (see Chapter 147), and neonatal abstinence syndrome (see Chapter 145). Both SGA and large-­for-­gestational-­age (LGA) are associated with increased morbidities. SMALL FOR GESTATIONAL AGE AND IUGR There is an important distinction between the terms small for ges- tational age (SGA) and intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR). SGA is based on physical evaluation of an infant at birth, usually by a pediatrician or neonatologist. If the infant’s weight is <10th percen- tile, the infant is SGA. The diagnosis of SGA does not differentiate between normal biologic growth potential and a pathologic or growth-­ restricted state in utero. In contrast, IUGR is a prenatal diagnosis to describe a fetus who fails to reach in utero growth potential, often diagnosed by the obstetrician using intrauterine growth curves and measures of compromise (e.g., abnormal Doppler flow measurements) (Fig. 119.10). This measure is independent of growth centile at birth. Therefore not all infants with IUGR are SGA, and, similarly, not all infants who are SGA have IUGR. Although it is important to understand the difference between SGA and IUGR, many studies evaluate postnatal outcomes based on a diag- nosis of either SGA or IUGR. Fig. 119.10  This is a 36-­week male neonate with a birthweight of 1,600 g who was born to a mother with severe preeclampsia. This baby was noted to have asymmetric intrauterine growth re- striction (IUGR). Note the loss of fat over the body, visible rib cage, excessive skin folds noted over the whole body, and relatively large head compared to the body. (From Sharma D, Shastri S, Shar- ma P. Intrauterine growth restriction: an- tenatal and postnatal aspects. Clin Med Insights Pediatr. 2016;10:67–83.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1048  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant IUGR is indicative of compromise in utero and is associated with medical conditions that interfere with the circulation and efficiency of the placenta, with the development or growth of the fetus, or with the general health and nutrition of the mother (Table 119.6). Many factors are common to both prematurely born and LBW infants with IUGR. IUGR is associated with decreased insulin production or insulin-­like growth factor (IGF) action at the receptor level. Infants with IGF-­1 recep- tor defects, pancreatic hypoplasia, or transient neonatal diabetes have IUGR. Genetic mutations affecting the glucose-­sensing mechanisms of the pancreatic islet cells result in decreased insulin release (loss of func- tion of the glucose-­sensing glucokinase gene) and give rise to IUGR. IUGR may be a normal fetal response to nutritional or oxygen depri- vation; therefore the issue is not the IUGR but rather the ongoing risk of fetal malnutrition or hypoxia. IUGR is often classified as reduced growth that is symmetric (head circumference, length, and weight equally affected) or asymmetric (with relative sparing of head growth) (Table 119.7). Symmetric IUGR often has an earlier onset in the first trimester of pregnancy and is associated with diseases that seriously affect fetal cell number, such as conditions with chromosomal, genetic, malformation, teratogenic, infectious, or severe maternal hypertensive etiologies. It is important to assess gestational age carefully in infants suspected to have symmetric IUGR because incorrect overestimation of gestational age may lead to the diagnosis of symmetric IUGR. It is also important to assess carefully for dysmorphic features in infants with symmetric IUGR. Asymmetric IUGR is often of late onset in the second half of pregnancy, demonstrates preservation of Doppler wave- form velocity to the carotid vessels, and is associated with poor mater- nal nutrition or with late onset or exacerbation of maternal vascular disease (preeclampsia, chronic hypertension). Table 119.8 lists common problems of infants with IUGR. In addi- tion, in both preterm and term infants, IUGR is associated with increased risk of cardiovascular disease across the life span, and both SGA and IUGR are associated with an increased risk of neurodevelop- mental impairment. To properly manage infants born IUGR and SGA, clinicians must prepare for the possible perinatal morbidities (e.g., hypoglycemia, hypothermia, pulmonary hypertension, feeding intoler- ance), perform any diagnostic testing needed to determine the etiology, and monitor closely for long-­term deficits (e.g., growth, neurodevelop- ment, cardiovascular). LARGE-­FOR-­GESTATIONAL-­AGE INFANTS Infants with birthweight >90th percentile for gestational age are called large for gestational age (LGA). Neonatal mortality rates decrease with increasing birthweight until approximately 4,000 g, after which they increase. These oversized infants are usually born at term, but Table 119.6     Factors Often Associated with Intrauterine Growth Restriction FETAL Chromosomal (trisomies, microdeletions, copy number variants) and monogenetic disorders Chronic fetal infections (cytomegalic inclusion disease, congenital rubella, syphilis) Congenital anomalies—syndrome complexes Irradiation Multiple gestation Pancreatic hypoplasia Insulin deficiency (production or action of insulin) Insulin-­like growth factor type I deficiency PLACENTAL Decreased placental weight, cellularity, or both Decrease in surface area Villous placentitis (bacterial, viral, parasitic) Infarction Tumor (chorioangioma, hydatidiform mole) Placental separation Placental mesenchymal dysplasia Twin transfusion syndrome MATERNAL/PATERNAL Preeclampsia Hypertension or renal disease, or both Hypoxemia (high altitude, cyanotic cardiac or pulmonary disease) Malnutrition (micronutrient or macronutrient deficiencies) Chronic illness Sickle cell anemia Drugs (opiates, alcohol, cigarettes, cocaine, prescribed medications, antimetabolites) Table 119.7     Characteristics of Symmetric vs Asymmetric IUGR CHARACTERISTICS SYMMETRIC IUGR ASYMMETRIC IUGR Typical period of insult and presentation Earlier gestation (often second trimester) Later gestation (often detected in the third trimester) Percentage of all IUGR cases 20–30% 70–80% Etiology Genetic disorders Congenital infections Placental insufficiency Antenatal scan Proportionately decreased head circumference (HC), abdominal circumference (AC), biparietal diameter, and femur length Only abdominal circumference decreased Cell number Decreased Normal Cell size Normal Decreased Postnatal anthropometry All parameters (HC, length, and weight) reduced Reduced weight, HC normal, length low to normal Features of malnutrition Less pronounced More pronounced IUGR, Intrauterine growth restriction. Adapted from Sharma D, Shastri S, Sharma P. Intrauterine growth restriction: –part 2. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2016 Mar 15:1–12. Table 119.8     Problems of Infants Small for Gestational Age or with Intrauterine Growth Restriction* PROBLEM PATHOGENESIS Intrauterine fetal demise Hypoxia, acidosis, infection, lethal anomaly Perinatal asphyxia ↓ Uteroplacental perfusion during labor ± chronic fetal hypoxia-­acidosis; meconium aspiration syndrome Hypoglycemia ↓ Tissue glycogen stores, ↓ gluconeogenesis, hyperinsulinism, ↑ glucose needs of hypoxia, hypothermia, large brain Polycythemia-­hyperviscosity Fetal hypoxia with ↑ erythropoietin production Reduced oxygen consumption/hypothermia Hypoxia, hypoglycemia, starvation effect, poor subcutaneous fat stores Dysmorphology Syndrome anomalads, chromosomal-­ genetic disorders, oligohydramnios-­ induced deformation, TORCH† *Other problems include pulmonary hemorrhage and those common to the gestational age–related risks of prematurity if born at <37 wk. †TORCH, Toxoplasmosis, other agents, rubella, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex infection. ↓, Decreased; ↑, increased. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 119  u  The High-­Risk Infant  1049 preterm infants with high weights for gestational age also have a sig- nificantly higher mortality than infants of the same size born at term; maternal diabetes and obesity are predisposing factors. Some infants are constitutionally large because of large parental size. LGA infants, regardless of their gestational age, have a higher incidence of shoulder dystocia and birth injuries, such as cervical and brachial plexus inju- ries, phrenic nerve damage with paralysis of the diaphragm, fractured clavicles, cephalohematomas, subdural hematomas, and ecchymoses of the head and face. LGA infants are also at increased risk for hypoglyce- mia and polycythemia. The incidence of congenital anomalies, particularly congenital heart disease, is also higher in LGA infants than in term infants of normal weight. POSTTERM INFANTS Postterm infants are those born after 42 weeks (294 days) of gestation, as calculated from the mother’s LMP. Historically, approximately 12% of pregnancies resulted in delivery after 42 weeks. However, with cur- rent evidence demonstrating significantly increased maternal, fetal and neonatal risks after 42 weeks’ gestation, obstetric interventions to induce labor often occur before 42 weeks, resulting in a decreasing rate of postterm births. The cause of true postterm birth or postmaturity is unknown, though some have been attributed to genetic influences and defects in fetal production of parturition hormones. Postterm infants are often dysmature, with normal length and head circumference but may have decreased weight, indicating impaired nutritional supply from placental insufficiency. Infants born postterm in association with presumed placental insufficiency may have various physical signs. Des- quamation, long nails, abundant hair, pale skin, alert faces, and loose skin, especially around the thighs and buttocks, give them the appear- ance of having recently lost weight; meconium-­stained nails, skin, vernix, umbilical cord, and placental membranes may also be noted. Common complications of postmaturity include perinatal depression, meconium aspiration syndrome, persistent pulmonary hypertension, hypoglycemia, hypocalcemia, and polycythemia. Perinatal mortality is 5.8% for infants born at ≥42 weeks’ gestational age, compared to 0.7% for those born at term. Mortality may be due to placental insufficiency or umbilical cord compression resulting in hypoxemia and asphyxia. Mortality has been greatly reduced through improved obstetric management. Data suggest that elective delivery between the 39th and 41st week of gestation for both nulliparous and multiparous women is associated with decreased maternal and neona- tal complications compared with those who were expectantly managed. Careful obstetric monitoring, including nonstress testing (NST), biophysical profile (BPP), or Doppler velocimetry, usually provides a rational basis for choosing one of three courses: nonintervention, induction of labor, or cesarean delivery. Induction of labor or cesarean birth may be indicated in older primigravidas >2 weeks beyond term, particularly if evidence of fetal distress is present. Medical problems in the newborn are treated if they arise. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 119.5  Follow-­Up of High-­Risk Infants After Discharge Andrea F. Duncan DISCHARGE FROM THE HOSPITAL Numerous criteria need to be met before a high-­risk infant is ready for discharge from the hospital (Table 119.9). Before discharge, infants should be taking most or all nutrition by nipple, either bottle or breast. Some medically fragile infants may require discharge while receiving gavage feedings or after placement of a gastrostomy tube, after the parents have received appropriate training and education. Growth should be occurring at steady increments, with a goal weight gain of approximately 30 g/day. Temperature should be stable and normal in an open crib. Infants should have had no recent episodes of apnea or bradycardia requiring intervention for at least 5-­7 days before discharge. Stable infants recovering from BPD may be dis- charged on a regimen of home oxygen given by nasal cannula as long as careful follow-­up is arranged with home pulse oximetry monitor- ing and outpatient visits. Some children may require discharge on higher ventilatory support in partnership with pulmonology. All infants with birthweight <1,500 g or gestational age <30 weeks at birth should undergo an eye examination to screen for ROP. If born preterm, hemoglobin or hematocrit should be determined to evalu- ate for possible anemia of prematurity. Every infant should have a hearing test before discharge. Routine vaccinations should be given based on chronological age before discharge. In addition, palivi- zumab (Synagis) should be given to eligible infants during respira- tory syncytial virus (RSV) season immediately before discharge for prophylaxis against RSV, with continued monthly doses arranged as an outpatient as appropriate. If all major medical problems have resolved and the home setting is adequate, premature infants may then be discharged when their weight approaches 1,800-­2,000 g, they are >34-­35 weeks postmenstrual age (PMA), and all the above criteria are met. Parental education, close follow-­up, and healthcare provider accessibility are all essential for early discharge protocols. The primary caregivers for the infant should have a chance to provide infant care in the hospital with nursing supervision and support before discharge home. All high-­risk infants should follow up with their primary care provider within a few days of discharge and should Table 119.9     Readiness for Discharge of High-­Risk Infants Criteria Resolution of acute life-­threatening illnesses Ongoing follow-­up for chronic but stable problems: Bronchopulmonary dysplasia Intraventricular hemorrhage Necrotizing enterocolitis after surgery or recovery Ventricular septal defect, other cardiac lesions Anemia Retinopathy of prematurity Hearing problems Apnea Cholestasis Stable temperature regulation Gain of weight with enteral feedings: Breastfeeding Bottle feeding Gastric tube feeding Free of significant apnea Appropriate immunizations and planning for respiratory syncytial virus prophylaxis if indicated Hearing screenings Ophthalmologic examination if <30 wk of gestation or <1,500 g at birth Parental knowledge, skill, and confidence documented in: Administration of medications (diuretics, methylxanthines, aerosols, etc.) Use of oxygen, apnea monitors, oximeters Nutritional support: Timing Volume Mixing concentrated formulas Recognition of illness and deterioration Basic cardiopulmonary resuscitation Infant safety Scheduling of referrals: Primary care provider Neonatal follow-­up clinic Occupational therapy/physical therapy Imaging (head ultrasound) Assessment of and solution to social risks Data from American Academy of Pediatrics, American College of Obstetricians: Guidelines for Perinatal Care. 7th ed. Elk Grove Village, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics; 2013. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1050  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant be followed in a follow-­up program that tracks medical and neurode- velopmental outcomes. POSTDISCHARGE FOLLOW-­UP Medical Follow-­Up Even after discharge from the hospital, high-­risk infants need very close medical follow-­up. They continue to be at increased risk for poor weight gain and failure to thrive. In the setting of viral illness, prema- ture infants are at increased risk for significant respiratory distress. Infants who are sent home on oxygen need very close medical follow- ­up with frequent visits and assessments, often with pulmonology. Table 119.10 lists common sequelae of prematurity. Medically complex infants can go home with a multitude of sub- specialty appointments to help manage existing morbidities second- ary to prematurity, for example, cardiology for management of a patent ductus arteriosus or pulmonary hypertension, pulmonary for BPD, nephrology for hypertension, ophthalmology for ROP, neurosurgery for hydrocephalus, and neurology for history of seizures. The extensive follow-­up requirements can be overwhelming and daunting for fami- lies. It is very important that these infants have a primary provider who serves as their “medical home” to help coordinate and assimilate the care from all these providers for families. This may be their primary care provider or subspecialty program provider. Developmental Follow-­Up Premature infants are at much greater risk for neurodevelopmental delays than their term counterparts; the more preterm, the greater the risk of delay. In addition, certain postnatal morbidities (severe BPD, grade III or IV intraventricular hemorrhage, severe ROP, seizures) are associated with significantly increased risk of developmental delays. It is very important that these infants, particularly those born preterm, are followed and assessed for developmental delay, so that if delays are detected targeted interventions can be instituted as early as possible. It is recommended that developmental follow-­up be available for infants born <32 weeks’ PMA, or at a minimum <28 weeks’ PMA and/ or <1 kg birthweight. Developmental follow-­up in the United States is most often provided in a neonatal follow-­up program for the first 2-­3 years of life, and in some cases, until school age. Assessments focus on five main developmental domains: cognitive development, lan- guage development, fine and gross motor skills, social development, and emotional development. Although many assessments exist, the most widely used assessment in the United States is the Bayley Scales of Infant and Toddler Development, 4th Edition. It is important to note that for at least the first 2 years of life, a child’s corrected age should be used in determining whether a delay exists. Corrected age is calculated by subtracting the weeks born premature from a child’s chronological age. In doing so, a corrected age accounts for a child’s prematurity. There is some debate whether corrected age should continue to be used after age 2 years. If it is determined that a delay exists, a child should be referred for appropriate therapy immediately to help minimize the delay as the child ages. Federal law under the Individuals with Disabilities Act requires states to provide early intervention services to children <3 years old with developmental delay. States vary greatly in how delay is defined and what services are offered. Early intervention is associated with improved cognitive outcomes in infancy and preschool age, but not lasting into school age. Motor outcomes are improved in infancy for children who receive early intervention, but this has not been shown to be a lasting effect into preschool and school age. However, these findings are difficult to interpret, given the heterogeneity of early interventions included in the reviews. With targeted interventions for specific delays, functional outcomes are improved. Premature infants, especially those with a history of grade III or IV intraventricular hemorrhage or PVL seen on head imaging, are also at increased risk of motor impairments. Cerebral palsy is a nonpro- gressive but permanent disorder of movement and posture caused by disturbance to the developing immature brain. Historically, cerebral palsy had not been diagnosed until 18-­24 months of age, but it can be diagnosed within the first 6 months of life. Early detection is critical to leveraging the neuroplasticity present in the very early years of life for improved function. International guidelines for early assessment and diagnosis of cerebral palsy and standardized assessments such as the General Movements Assessment (GMA) and the Hammersmith Infant Neurological Examination (HINE) are recommended in the guidelines to help identify children at high risk for or with cerebral palsy within the first few months to a year of life. This enables these children to access early intervention services and therapy at an earlier age, as well as undergo more frequent surveillance as needed. Children with a history of prematurity who do not show significant developmental delays in the first few years of life are still at risk of later developing learning disabilities, attention problems, and decreased school achievement. Continued screening by their primary care pro- vider is needed as these children age. More subtle deficits may not be recognized until school age; therefore continued surveillance is critical. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Table 119.10     Sequelae of Prematurity IMMEDIATE LATE Hypoxia, ischemia Intellectual disability, spastic diplegia, microcephaly, seizures, poor school performance Intraventricular hemorrhage Intellectual disability, spasticity, seizures, post hemorrhagic hydrocephalus Sensorineural injury Hearing and visual impairment, retinopathy of prematurity, strabismus, myopia Respiratory failure Bronchopulmonary dysplasia, pulmonary hypertension, bronchospasm, malnutrition, subglottic stenosis Necrotizing enterocolitis Short-­bowel syndrome, malabsorption, malnutrition Cholestatic liver disease Cirrhosis, hepatic failure, malnutrition Nutrient deficiency Osteopenia, fractures, anemia, growth failure Social stress Child abuse or neglect, failure to thrive, divorce Other sequelae Sudden infant death syndrome, infections, inguinal hernia, cutaneous scars (chest tube, patent ductus arteriosus ligation, intravenous infiltration), gastroesophageal reflux, hypertension, craniosynostosis, cholelithiasis, nephrocalcinosis, cutaneous hemangiomas Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 120  u  Transport of the Critically Ill Newborn  1051 REGIONALIZED CARE OF NEWBORNS The concept of regionalized care for neonates emphasizes the impor- tance of providing regionalized care for infants in facilities with adequate personnel and equipment for an infant’s severity of illness. Ideally, pregnant people should give birth to infants at a facility with the appropriate level of expertise and resources to care for the degree of prematurity and illness of the infant. Very low birthweight (VLBW) infants, or infants <1,500 g at birth, have decreased morbidity and mortality when born at Level III hospitals. In a meta-­analysis, neonatal or predischarge death occurred in 38% of VLBW infants receiving care at a non–Level III hospital and 23% of those receiving care at a Level III hospital. A main objective of Healthy People 2020 addresses this issue, with a goal of increasing the proportion of VLBW infants born at Level III hospitals or subspecialty perinatal centers to 83.7%. When possible it is more preferable to transport the pregnant person to meet the goals of regionalization. LEVELS OF NEONATAL CARE A Level I facility must be able to provide basic neonatal care. Appropri- ate equipment and staff must be available to perform neonatal resusci- tation and care for healthy term and late preterm infants. In addition, Level I facilities must have the capacity to work to stabilize ill or pre- term infants before transport to a higher level of care. A Level I nursery is the minimum requirement for a hospital providing inpatient mater- nity care. Providers at Level I facilities usually include pediatricians, family physicians, and nurse practitioners. In addition to the care provided at a Level I facility, Level II nurs- eries must also be capable of providing care to moderately ill term infants with problems expected to resolve quickly. Level II centers also care for infants born ≥32 weeks’ gestational age and >1,500 g at birth; therefore they must be comfortable with treating conditions common in this population, such as difficulty with oral feeds, apnea of prema- turity, respiratory distress requiring continuous positive airway pres- sure (CPAP), and temperature regulation. These centers must also be capable of stabilizing infants born <32 weeks’ gestation and <1,500 g until transfer to a higher-­level facility is feasible, including the ability to intubate and provide mechanical ventilation for a brief duration if necessary. In addition to providers in Level I facilities, Level II facilities also typically have pediatric hospitalists, neonatologists, and neonatal nurse practitioners. Level III NICUs are equipped to care for extremely preterm and critically ill neonates in addition to those infants cared for at Level I and II units. Level III units must have continuously available personnel and equipment to treat conditions commonly seen in this population, such as respiratory distress syndrome, pulmonary hypertension, and need for total parenteral nutrition. Resources should be available to obtain and interpret urgent imaging needed (e.g., CT, echocardiogra- phy). Pediatric subspecialists and pediatric surgeons should be avail- able either on-­site or through prearranged consultative agreements. In addition to the care available at Level III neonatal intensive care units (NICUs), Level IV NICUs are also capable of providing con- tinuously available pediatric subspecialty consultation and pediat- ric surgical intervention. Many Level IV sites are located at regional children’s hospitals and also serve to provide outreach education. Level IV NICUs also have the capacity to provide extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO), an intervention that requires sur- geons for catheter placement and ECMO specialists who are typically nurses or respiratory therapists with additional training in managing the ECMO circuit. TRANSPORT OF THE CRITICALLY ILL NEONATE In the event that a neonate requires a higher level of care, transport must be arranged to a unit with the appropriate level of care available. Additional decisions that need to be made before transport include composition of the transport team, equipment required for transport, and mode of transportation. The composition of the transport team varies depending on per- sonnel available and the needs of the infant being transported. The transport team often comprises at least two individuals, whether two registered transport trained nurses (RNs), an RN and a respira- tory therapist, or an RN and a paramedic. In addition, a neonatolo- gist, neonatology fellow, or neonatal nurse practitioner will sometimes accompany the transport team for critically ill neonates. A medical command physician is also available and can communicate with the transport team during the transport, as needed. The command physi- cian is also able to communicate with the referring neonatologist to discuss the case and offer advice while the transport team is en route. Transport staff must be competent in the treatment of common neonatal conditions and complications, as well as neonatal procedures. Many Level IV facilities have specialized teams designed only for neo- natal transports. However, a Cochrane review found no evidence to support or to refute improved infant morbidity or mortality when transport occurred with a specialized neonatal team versus those that transported both neonatal as well as pediatric patients. Depending on the volume of neonatal transports and composition of the team, staff may have limited exposure to neonatal transports and procedures. Simulation-­based learning is recommended by the American Acad- emy of Pediatrics (AAP) Section on Transport Medicine (SOTM) as a method to help achieve and retain competency in rarely experienced procedures, as well as improve team interactions for transport teams. The transport vehicle should be equipped with appropriate medi- cines, intravenous (IV) fluids, oxygen tanks, catheters, chest tubes, endotracheal tubes (ETTs), laryngoscopes, bag-­valve-­mask, and infant warming device. It should be well illuminated and have ample room for emergency procedures and monitoring equipment. Additional needs for an individual transport should be anticipated. Specifically, inhaled nitric oxide is not standard equipment for most transport teams and will need to be requested if thought necessary for safe transport. For neonates with hypoxemic ischemic encephalopathy who require hypo- thermia therapy, a servo-­controlled cooling device is recommended as it will achieve the target temperature faster and there is less risk of over- shooting the goal temperature. Prostaglandin E1 should be available for suspected ductal dependent congenital heart disease. Common modes of transport include ground transport by ambu- lance and air transport by helicopter or fixed-­wing aircraft. The stability of the infant, travel distance, traffic, and weather must all be taken into account when deciding the most appropriate mode of transportation. Steps should be taken to stabilize the infant, as able, in a timely fashion before the transport. Securing an airway, providing oxygen, assisting with infant ventilation, providing antimicrobial therapy, maintaining the circulation, providing a warmed environment, check- ing a glucose level, and placing IV or arterial lines or chest tubes should be initiated, if indicated, before transport. Appropriate placement of lines and ETT should be evaluated before transport. Some hospitals and their associated level IV NICUs offer transport of a patient on ECMO. Most commonly this is designed to transport a patient who is already cannulated onto ECMO who needs subspecial- ized care such as evaluation for transplant, or assessment for longer-­term mechanical cardiac support. In other situations, a hospital may have the capacity to cannulate a patient onto ECMO, but do not have a program in place to support the patient for the coming days. These patients may therefore include more common patients who require ECMO such as neonates with persistent pulmonary hypertension, severe hypoxemic respiratory failure, sepsis, congenital diaphragmatic hernia, or hypoplas- tic left heart syndrome. In these circumstances, a transport team needs to include an ECMO specialist or perfusionist, and commonly adds a Chapter 120 Transport of the Critically Ill Newborn David A. Munson Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1052  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant critical care physician or surgeon. There are some programs that will bring the necessary personnel and equipment to cannulate a patient onto an ECMO circuit at the referring hospital before transport. There are considerable logistical challenges and added risks for transporting a patient on ECMO. These include inadvertent decannulation, problems with sustaining flow on the circuit, and bleeding. Risks of transport and consent for transportation should be reviewed and obtained from parents before transport. Although trans- port teams attempt to anticipate and prepare for possible complications that could occur during transport, there is an inherent risk of com- plications, including death, in the event of a decompensation during transport resulting from the limited resources and personnel available. It is intrinsically more difficult to perform procedures in the physi- cally confined space of an ambulance or helicopter. Additionally, there is the risk associated with the mode of transport itself including car and helicopter crashes. Parents should be made aware of these risks. Efforts should be made to allow parents to see their baby briefly before transport. Communication with the transport team as well as the receiv- ing facility is paramount throughout the transport process. Avail- able prenatal history, information on the infant’s resuscitation and hospital course, laboratory data, and radiographic images should be sent with the transport team to the receiving hospital to aid in future care. Video-­assisted telecommunications can assist in giving the medical command physician visual as well as audio informa- tion about what is happening on-­site before the patient is loaded onto the ambulance. Reverse transport of an infant back to a lower level of care should be considered when infants are stabilized or have received and recov- ered from their subspecialist or surgical interventions, and no longer require the higher-­level care available at the receiving hospital. Trans- port back to the hospital of birth aids in appropriate utilization of resources, decreases costs of care, and may further promote parent– infant bonding because of proximity to the mother’s home. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. A variety of conditions that affect the newborn originate in utero, during birth, or in the immediate postnatal period. These disorders can be caused by prematurity, congenital malformations, disruption of chromosome structure, or acquired diseases and injuries. ABNORMAL MOVEMENTS Neonatal seizures usually suggest a central nervous system (CNS) dis- order, such as hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy (HIE), intracranial hemorrhage, stroke, cerebral anomaly, subdural effusion, or meningitis (see Chapter 633.7). In the neonate, seizures can also be secondary to hypocalcemia, hypoglycemia, benign familial seizures, or rarely, pyri- doxine dependence, hyponatremia, hypernatremia, inborn errors of metabolism, or drug withdrawal. Chapter 121 Clinical Manifestations of Diseases in the Newborn Period Kathleen A. Gibbs and Eric C. Eichenwald Seizures in premature infants are often subtle and associated with abnormal eye movement (fluttering, tonic horizontal deviation, sus- tained eye opening with ocular fixation) or facial movement (chew- ing, tongue thrusting); the motor component is often that of tonic extension of the limbs, neck, and trunk. Autonomic phenomena include hypertension and tachycardia. Term infants may have focal or multifocal, clonic or myoclonic movements, but they may also have subtler manifestations of seizure activity. Apnea may be the first manifestation of seizure activity, particularly in a premature infant. Seizures may adversely affect the subsequent neurodevelopmental outcome and may even predispose an infant to seizures outside the neonatal period. Electroencephalographic (EEG) evidence of sei- zures can occur without clinical manifestations, particularly in pre- term infants. If seizures are suspected, video-­EEG monitoring will improve the detection of both subtle and electrographic but clinically silent seizures. Seizures contribute to brain injury and the impact of treatment on neurodevelopmental outcomes is an active area of research, particularly in patients with HIE. Although many medica- tions used to treat seizures have side effects, it is recommended to treat both clinical and subclinical seizures. Seizures should be distinguished from the jitteriness, defined as recurrent tremors, that may be present in healthy newborns, in infants of diabetic mothers, in those who experienced birth asphyxia or drug withdrawal, and in polycythemic neonates. An examiner can sup- press the tremors by holding the infant’s extremity; jitteriness often depends on sensory stimuli and occurs when the infant is active, and it is not associated with abnormal eye movements. Tremors are often more rapid with a smaller amplitude than those of tonic-­clonic seizures. After severe birth asphyxia, infants may exhibit motor automa- tisms characterized by recurrent oral-­buccal-­lingual movements, rotary limb activities (rowing, pedaling, swimming), tonic posturing, or myoclonus. These motor activities are not usually accompanied by time-­synchronized EEG discharges, may not signify cortical epilep- tic activity, respond poorly to anticonvulsant therapy, and are associ- ated with a poor prognosis. Such automatisms may represent cortical depression that produces a brainstem release phenomenon or subcorti- cal seizures. Failure to move an extremity (pseudoparalysis) suggests fracture, dislocation, or a paralytic brachial plexus injury, often following a trau- matic delivery. It is also seen in neonatal stroke (paralytic) as well as septic arthritis, osteomyelitis, and other infections that cause pain on movement of the affected part. ABNORMAL TONE Hypotonia, or low tone in one or more extremities, may be due to specific genetic etiologies or as a result of pathology in the peripheral or central nervous system. Features in the history and physical exami- nation can help narrow the differential diagnosis and guide further diagnostic evaluations (see Chapter 647). A history of decreased fetal movement in utero may be suggestive of a congenital myopathy, or spi- nal muscular atrophy. In a male infant with cryptorchidism, Prader-­ Willi syndrome can be considered. Hypotonia is a common finding in an infant with trisomy 21. Hypertonia is less common and should be distinguished from fixed joint contractures seen in arthrogryposis. If present in the hours after birth and associated with the need for resus- citation after birth, a case of HIE should be considered. ALTERED MENTAL STATUS Lethargy may be a manifestation of infection, asphyxia, hypoglyce- mia, hypercapnia, sedation from maternal analgesia or anesthesia, an inborn error of metabolism (IEM), or, almost any severe disease. Shortly after birth, lethargy is most likely caused by maternal medica- tions (opioids, magnesium, general anesthesia) or moderate to severe HIE. Lethargy appearing after the second day should suggest infection or an IEM manifesting with hyperammonemia, acidosis, or hypoglyce- mia. Lethargy with emesis may suggest increased intracranial pressure or an IEM. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1052  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant critical care physician or surgeon. There are some programs that will bring the necessary personnel and equipment to cannulate a patient onto an ECMO circuit at the referring hospital before transport. There are considerable logistical challenges and added risks for transporting a patient on ECMO. These include inadvertent decannulation, problems with sustaining flow on the circuit, and bleeding. Risks of transport and consent for transportation should be reviewed and obtained from parents before transport. Although trans- port teams attempt to anticipate and prepare for possible complications that could occur during transport, there is an inherent risk of com- plications, including death, in the event of a decompensation during transport resulting from the limited resources and personnel available. It is intrinsically more difficult to perform procedures in the physi- cally confined space of an ambulance or helicopter. Additionally, there is the risk associated with the mode of transport itself including car and helicopter crashes. Parents should be made aware of these risks. Efforts should be made to allow parents to see their baby briefly before transport. Communication with the transport team as well as the receiv- ing facility is paramount throughout the transport process. Avail- able prenatal history, information on the infant’s resuscitation and hospital course, laboratory data, and radiographic images should be sent with the transport team to the receiving hospital to aid in future care. Video-­assisted telecommunications can assist in giving the medical command physician visual as well as audio informa- tion about what is happening on-­site before the patient is loaded onto the ambulance. Reverse transport of an infant back to a lower level of care should be considered when infants are stabilized or have received and recov- ered from their subspecialist or surgical interventions, and no longer require the higher-­level care available at the receiving hospital. Trans- port back to the hospital of birth aids in appropriate utilization of resources, decreases costs of care, and may further promote parent– infant bonding because of proximity to the mother’s home. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. A variety of conditions that affect the newborn originate in utero, during birth, or in the immediate postnatal period. These disorders can be caused by prematurity, congenital malformations, disruption of chromosome structure, or acquired diseases and injuries. ABNORMAL MOVEMENTS Neonatal seizures usually suggest a central nervous system (CNS) dis- order, such as hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy (HIE), intracranial hemorrhage, stroke, cerebral anomaly, subdural effusion, or meningitis (see Chapter 633.7). In the neonate, seizures can also be secondary to hypocalcemia, hypoglycemia, benign familial seizures, or rarely, pyri- doxine dependence, hyponatremia, hypernatremia, inborn errors of metabolism, or drug withdrawal. Chapter 121 Clinical Manifestations of Diseases in the Newborn Period Kathleen A. Gibbs and Eric C. Eichenwald Seizures in premature infants are often subtle and associated with abnormal eye movement (fluttering, tonic horizontal deviation, sus- tained eye opening with ocular fixation) or facial movement (chew- ing, tongue thrusting); the motor component is often that of tonic extension of the limbs, neck, and trunk. Autonomic phenomena include hypertension and tachycardia. Term infants may have focal or multifocal, clonic or myoclonic movements, but they may also have subtler manifestations of seizure activity. Apnea may be the first manifestation of seizure activity, particularly in a premature infant. Seizures may adversely affect the subsequent neurodevelopmental outcome and may even predispose an infant to seizures outside the neonatal period. Electroencephalographic (EEG) evidence of sei- zures can occur without clinical manifestations, particularly in pre- term infants. If seizures are suspected, video-­EEG monitoring will improve the detection of both subtle and electrographic but clinically silent seizures. Seizures contribute to brain injury and the impact of treatment on neurodevelopmental outcomes is an active area of research, particularly in patients with HIE. Although many medica- tions used to treat seizures have side effects, it is recommended to treat both clinical and subclinical seizures. Seizures should be distinguished from the jitteriness, defined as recurrent tremors, that may be present in healthy newborns, in infants of diabetic mothers, in those who experienced birth asphyxia or drug withdrawal, and in polycythemic neonates. An examiner can sup- press the tremors by holding the infant’s extremity; jitteriness often depends on sensory stimuli and occurs when the infant is active, and it is not associated with abnormal eye movements. Tremors are often more rapid with a smaller amplitude than those of tonic-­clonic seizures. After severe birth asphyxia, infants may exhibit motor automa- tisms characterized by recurrent oral-­buccal-­lingual movements, rotary limb activities (rowing, pedaling, swimming), tonic posturing, or myoclonus. These motor activities are not usually accompanied by time-­synchronized EEG discharges, may not signify cortical epilep- tic activity, respond poorly to anticonvulsant therapy, and are associ- ated with a poor prognosis. Such automatisms may represent cortical depression that produces a brainstem release phenomenon or subcorti- cal seizures. Failure to move an extremity (pseudoparalysis) suggests fracture, dislocation, or a paralytic brachial plexus injury, often following a trau- matic delivery. It is also seen in neonatal stroke (paralytic) as well as septic arthritis, osteomyelitis, and other infections that cause pain on movement of the affected part. ABNORMAL TONE Hypotonia, or low tone in one or more extremities, may be due to specific genetic etiologies or as a result of pathology in the peripheral or central nervous system. Features in the history and physical exami- nation can help narrow the differential diagnosis and guide further diagnostic evaluations (see Chapter 647). A history of decreased fetal movement in utero may be suggestive of a congenital myopathy, or spi- nal muscular atrophy. In a male infant with cryptorchidism, Prader-­ Willi syndrome can be considered. Hypotonia is a common finding in an infant with trisomy 21. Hypertonia is less common and should be distinguished from fixed joint contractures seen in arthrogryposis. If present in the hours after birth and associated with the need for resus- citation after birth, a case of HIE should be considered. ALTERED MENTAL STATUS Lethargy may be a manifestation of infection, asphyxia, hypoglyce- mia, hypercapnia, sedation from maternal analgesia or anesthesia, an inborn error of metabolism (IEM), or, almost any severe disease. Shortly after birth, lethargy is most likely caused by maternal medica- tions (opioids, magnesium, general anesthesia) or moderate to severe HIE. Lethargy appearing after the second day should suggest infection or an IEM manifesting with hyperammonemia, acidosis, or hypoglyce- mia. Lethargy with emesis may suggest increased intracranial pressure or an IEM. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 121  u  Clinical Manifestations of Diseases in the Newborn Period  1053 Irritability may be a sign of discomfort accompanying intraab- dominal conditions, meningeal irritation, drug withdrawal, infections, trauma (birth or nonaccidental), or any condition producing pain. It must be distinguished from normal crying behavior associated with hunger or benign environmental stimuli. The lack of an interest to feed may indicate a sick infant and should prompt a careful search for infection, a CNS (brain or spine) or periph- eral nervous system disorder, IEM, or intestinal obstruction. APNEA Periods of apnea, particularly in premature infants, can be attributed to many different underlying causes (see Chapter 125). When apnea occurs in a term infant, it should be considered pathologic until proven otherwise, and an immediate diagnostic evaluation for the underlying cause is imperative. CONGENITAL ANOMALIES Congenital anomalies are a common cause of neonatal morbidity and mortality worldwide (see Chapters 98–100). Early recognition of anomalies during fetal life is important to plan for delivery room man- agement and subsequent neonatal care. Some malformations, includ- ing congenital heart disease, tracheoesophageal fistula, diaphragmatic hernia, choanal atresia, and intestinal obstruction, require immediate medical/surgical therapy for postnatal survival (Table 121.1). Prena- tal and postnatal testing strategies, including advanced imaging tech- niques and genetic testing, have improved the specific diagnosis of congenital anomalies (see Chapter 103.1). Historically, genetic testing was performed by obtaining a karyotype with or without fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). A karyotype can identify a large number of chromosomal abnormalities; FISH can test for classic microdeletion syndromes such as 22q11. Chromosomal microarray is also indicated for genetic testing of infants with congenital anomalies because it can identify microdeletions or microduplications that are too small to be detected by more traditional techniques. In cases where a common aneuploidy, such as trisomy 13, 18, or 21, is suspected, obtaining a conventional karyotype and/or FISH may be the more appropriate test as those results are available in a few days. Whole exome sequencing (WES) uses next-­generation sequencing to identify variants in protein coding genes that may be responsible for a disease phenotype. Rapid WES can have results available in 1-­2 weeks. This can be used in a critically ill infant with a suspected genetic disorder that lacks a unify- ing diagnosis, and it may lead to a specific treatment and prognosis. Limitations of both microarray and WES include the identification of variants that may not be pathogenic in nature. Parents should receive genetic counseling as part of any testing strategy. It is important that healthcare providers are aware of the indication and limitations of the type of genetic test being performed. CYANOSIS Central cyanosis generates a broad differential diagnosis encompass- ing respiratory, cardiac, CNS, infectious, hematologic, and metabolic etiologies (Table 121.2). Typically, 5 g/dL of deoxyhemoglobin must be present in the blood for central cyanosis to be clinically apparent. If respiratory insufficiency is caused by pulmonary conditions, respira- tions tend to be rapid with increased work of breathing. If caused by CNS depression, respirations tend to be irregular and weak and are often slow. Cyanosis unaccompanied by obvious signs of respiratory difficulty suggests cyanotic congenital heart disease or methemoglo- binemia. Cyanosis resulting from congenital heart disease may be difficult to distinguish clinically from cyanosis caused by respiratory disease. Episodes of cyanosis may also be the initial sign of hypogly- cemia, bacteremia, meningitis, shock, or pulmonary hypertension. Peripheral acrocyanosis is common in neonates and thought to rep- resent peripheral venous congestion associated with immature control of peripheral vascular tone. It does not usually warrant concern unless poor perfusion is suspected. GASTROINTESTINAL DISTURBANCES Vomiting during the first day of life can suggest obstruction in the upper digestive tract, metabolic disease, or may be physiologic. Abdominal distention with emesis, usually a sign of intestinal obstruc- tion or an intraabdominal mass, may also be seen in infants with enteritis, necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC), isolated intestinal perfora- tion, ileus accompanying sepsis, respiratory distress, ascites, or hypo- kalemia. Imaging studies are indicated when obstruction is suspected; proximal intestinal obstruction often occurs with a normal physical examination, whereas distal obstruction will likely be accompanied by distention. Vomiting may also be a nonspecific symptom of an illness such as sepsis with associated abdominal distention and ileus. It is a common manifestation of overfeeding, as well as gastroesophageal or physiologic reflux. Rarely, vomiting is caused by pyloric stenosis, milk protein allergy, duodenal ulcer, stress ulcer, an IEM (hyperammone- mia, metabolic acidosis), or adrenal insufficiency. Vomitus containing blood is usually a sign of a serious illness, but the benign possibility of swallowed maternal blood associated with the delivery process should also be considered. Tests for maternal vs fetal hemoglobin can help Table 121.1     Common Life-­Threatening Congenital Anomalies ANOMALY MANIFESTATIONS Choanal atresia Respiratory distress in delivery room; nasogastric tube cannot be passed through nares Suspect CHARGE (coloboma of eye, heart anomaly, choanal atresia, retardation, genital and ear anomalies) syndrome Pierre Robin syndrome, Stickler syndrome Micrognathia, cleft palate, airway obstruction Diaphragmatic hernia Scaphoid abdomen, bowel sounds present in chest, respiratory distress Tracheoesophageal fistula Polyhydramnios, aspiration pneumonia, excessive salivation; nasogastric tube cannot be placed in stomach Suspect VATER (vertebral defects, imperforate anus, tracheoesophageal fistula, radial and renal dysplasia) syndrome Intestinal obstruction: volvulus, duodenal atresia, ileal atresia Polyhydramnios, bile-­stained emesis, abdominal distention Suspect trisomy 21, cystic fibrosis, or cocaine use Gastroschisis, omphalocele Polyhydramnios, intestinal obstruction Renal agenesis, Potter syndrome Oligohydramnios, anuria, pulmonary hypoplasia, pneumothorax Neural tube defects: anencephaly, meningomyelocele Polyhydramnios, elevated α-­fetoprotein, decreased fetal activity Ductus-­dependent congenital heart disease Cyanosis, hypotension, murmur Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1054  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant Table 121.2     Differential Diagnosis of Cyanosis in the Newborn CENTRAL OR PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM HYPOVENTILATION Birth asphyxia Intracranial hypertension, hemorrhage Oversedation (direct or through maternal route) Diaphragm palsy Neuromuscular diseases Seizures RESPIRATORY DISEASE Airway Choanal atresia/stenosis Pierre Robin syndrome Intrinsic airway obstruction (laryngeal/bronchial/tracheal stenosis) Extrinsic airway obstruction (bronchogenic cyst, duplication cyst, vascular compression) Lung Respiratory distress syndrome Transient tachypnea Meconium aspiration Pneumonia (sepsis) Pneumothorax Congenital diaphragmatic hernia Pulmonary hypoplasia CARDIAC RIGHT-­TO-­LEFT SHUNT Abnormal Connections (Pulmonary Blood Flow Normal or Increased) Transposition of great vessels Total anomalous pulmonary venous return Truncus arteriosus Hypoplastic left heart syndrome Single ventricle or tricuspid atresia with large ventricular septal defect but without pulmonic stenosis OBSTRUCTED PULMONARY BLOOD FLOW (PULMONARY BLOOD FLOW DECREASED) Pulmonic atresia with intact ventricular septum Tetralogy of Fallot Critical pulmonic stenosis with patent foramen ovale or atrial septal defect Tricuspid atresia Single ventricle with pulmonic stenosis Ebstein malformation of tricuspid valve Persistent fetal circulation (persistent pulmonary hypertension of newborn) METHEMOGLOBINEMIA Congenital (hemoglobin M, methemoglobin reductase deficiency) Acquired (nitrates, nitrites) INADEQUATE DELIVERY Inadequate ambient O2 or less O2 delivered than expected (rare) Disconnection of O2 supply to nasal cannula, head hood Connection of air, rather than O2, to a mechanical ventilator SPURIOUS/ARTIFACTUAL Oximeter artifact (poor contact between probe and skin, poor pulse searching) Arterial blood gas artifact (contamination with venous blood) OTHER Hypoglycemia Adrenogenital syndrome Polycythemia Blood loss From Smith F: Cyanosis. In: Kliegman RM: Practical Strategies in Pediatric Diagnosis and Therapy. Philadelphia: Saunders; 1996. discriminate between these possibilities. Bilious emesis in a term infant should be considered a surgical emergency with a presumed diagnosis of intestinal malrotation with or without volvulus until proven other- wise. This finding warrants urgent contrast radiography of the upper gastrointestinal tract (see Chapter 376.3). Diarrhea may be a symptom of overfeeding (especially high–caloric density formula), acute gastroenteritis, congenital diarrhea syndromes, or malabsorption, or it may be a nonspecific symptom of infection. Diarrhea should be differentiated from the normal loose, seedy, yellow stool seen typically in breastfed infants. Diarrhea may occur in condi- tions accompanied by compromised circulation of part of the intestinal or genital tract, such as mesenteric thrombosis, NEC, strangulated her- nia, intussusception, and torsion of the ovary or testis. HYPOTENSION Hypotension in term infants implies hypovolemic shock (hemorrhage, dehydration), a systemic inflammatory response syndrome (bacterial sepsis, intrauterine infection, NEC, cardiac dysfunction, myocarditis, asphyxia-­induced myocardial stunning, anomalous coronary artery), congenital heart disease with ductal-­dependent systemic blood flow (hypoplastic left heart syndrome, congenital aortic stenosis), pneumo- thorax, pneumopericardium, pericardial effusion, or metabolic disor- ders (hypoglycemia, adrenal insufficiency). Hypotension is a common problem in sick preterm infants and may also be caused by any of the problems noted in a term infant. Some extremely low gestational age infants do not respond to fluids or ino- tropic agents but may improve with administration of intravenous hydrocortisone (Fig. 121.1). Sudden onset of hypotension in a very low birthweight (VLBW) infant suggests pneumothorax, intraventricular hemorrhage, or subcapsular hepatic hematoma. Strategies used to sup- port blood pressure include volume expansion with crystalloid and/or colloid, vasopressors (dopamine, dobutamine, epinephrine, norepineph- rine, vasopressin), or corticosteroids (hydrocortisone) (see Chapter 85). JAUNDICE Jaundice during the first 24 hours of life warrants diagnostic evaluation and should be considered pathologic until proven otherwise. Hemo- lytic disease of the newborn due to rhesus blood group system (Rh) isoimmunization or blood type compatibility are the most common cause (see Chapter 140). Intrauterine infections (e.g., syphilis, cyto- megalovirus, and toxoplasmosis), early-­onset sepsis, or gestational alloimmune liver disease (formerly described as neonatal hemochro- matosis) should be considered in infants with neonatal cholestasis, identified by an increase in direct bilirubin value. Immediate evalua- tion includes obtaining total and direct bilirubin, infant blood type and Coombs status, CBC, and reticulocyte count. There are nomograms specific to the age (in hours) of the infant to guide the initiation of ther- apeutic interventions depending on the levels of serum bilirubin values (see Chapter 137). Phototherapy is the standard first-­line therapy. In the case of Coombs-­positive hemolysis, strong consideration should be made to giving intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) if there is no response to intensive phototherapy. Double volume exchange transfu- sion is recommended in situations with rapidly rising indirect bilirubin levels, particularly in infants whose bilirubin levels rise over 20 mg/dL. In these cases, obtaining a serum albumin is also recommended. Jaundice that is identified after the first 24 hours of age may be physi- ologic or pathologic. Physiologic conditions include breast-­milk and breast-­feeding jaundice. Pathologic conditions include bacterial sepsis, congenital hypothyroidism, galactosemia, congenital atresia of the bile ducts, or other conditions (see Chapter 137). PAIN Pain in neonates may be unrecognized and/or undertreated. The inten- sive care of neonates may involve several painful procedures, including blood sampling (heelstick, venous or arterial puncture), endotracheal intubation and suctioning, mechanical ventilation, and insertion of chest tubes and intravascular catheters. Pain in neonates results in Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 121  u  Clinical Manifestations of Diseases in the Newborn Period  1055 obvious distress and acute physiologic stress responses, which may have developmental implications for pain in later life. Pain and discomfort are potentially avoidable problems during the treatment of sick infants. The most common painful stimuli for healthy newborns include circumcision and phlebotomy while obtaining met- abolic screening tests. There are pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic options to both prevent and treat pain. Oral sucrose solutions are well tolerated by most infants and have proven efficacy for procedural pain. A dorsal penile nerve block is effective to prevent procedural-­related pain during a circumcision. For neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) infants, the most frequently used drugs are intermittent or continuous doses of opioids. Although the specific long-­term effects of opioids and sedatives are not well established, the first concern should be the treat- ment and/or prevention of acute pain (Table 121.3). Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 121.1  Hyperthermia Kathleen A. Gibbs and Eric C. Eichenwald Serious infection (pneumonia, bacteremia, meningitis, and viral infec- tions, particularly herpes simplex or enteroviruses) may cause fever and must be considered, although such infections often occur without pro- voking a febrile response in newborn infants (see Chapter 220). Provid- ers should consider evaluation for bacterial infection in infants <28 days old with a rectal temperature ≥38°C (100.5°F), including blood culture, urine culture, and lumbar puncture (LP), although stepwise approaches to identify low-­risk patients and limiting LP to a subset of higher-­risk infants are gaining favor. Fever immediately after birth may be caused by radiant warmers, maternal fever, or maternal epidural analgesia. Fever may also be caused by elevated environmental temperatures because of weather, overheated nurseries, incubators, or radiant warmers, or exces- sive clothing. It has also been attributed to dehydration, although dehy- dration fever is a diagnosis of exclusion in newborn infants. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 121.2  Hypothermia and Cold Stress Kathleen A. Gibbs and Eric C. Eichenwald Unexplained hypothermia may accompany infection or other serious disturbances of the circulation or CNS. A sudden servo-­controlled increase in incubator ambient temperature to maintain body temperature is a sign of temperature instability and may be associated with sepsis or any of the conditions already mentioned. Cold stress can lead to profound decompensation, including apnea, bradycardia, respiratory distress, hypoglycemia, and poor feeding. For this reason, it is paramount for the neonate to main- tain normothermia in the delivery room and afterward, especially low birthweight and premature infants. For VLBW infants, a com- bination of occlusive plastic wrap, radiant warmers, and thermal mattresses to maintain normothermia can be used to reduce cold stress. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 121.3  Edema Kathleen A. Gibbs and Eric C. Eichenwald Generalized edema noted in the delivery room can be caused by hydrops fetalis secondary to several underlying causes (see Chapter 143). An infant with suspected hydrops in utero should be delivered at a specialty perinatal center with capacity for neonatal intubation, thoracentesis, paracentesis, and pericardiocentesis in the delivery room. If noted after 24 hours of age, causes are similar to those of older children and may be multifactorial and likely related to the underlying disease state. Edema may be due to interstitial fluid “third-­spacing” due to a systemic inflammatory response seen in sepsis or NEC; or, in the immediate postoperative period, hypo- albuminemia may be due to low production in hepatic synthetic dysfunction or increased losses in underlying renal disease such a congenital nephrotic syndrome (see Chapter 567.3). Decision made to treat with hydrocortisone Give a test dose of 1 mg/kg No rise in blood pressure after 2 – 4 hours No further dosing Dose at 0.5mg/kg every 6 – 8 hours* Dose at 0.5mg/kg every 12 hours* Monitor cardiovascular status and modify as needed* <34 weeks ≥34 weeks *Cortisol metabolism is highly variable between individuals. If an individual infant responds to the test dose, but hypotension recurs using a dosing interval as short as 6 hours, the dose can be increased to 1mg/kg, with the interval guided by cardiovascular status. Rise in blood pressure within 2 – 4 hours Fig. 121.1  Suggested treatment algorithm for hydrocortisone dosing in the newborn. (From Watterberg KL. Hydrocortisone dosing for hy- potension in newborn infants: less is more. J Pediatr. 2016;174:23–26.) Table 121.3     Pain in the Neonate: General Considerations • Pain in newborns is often unrecognized and/or undertreated. • If a procedure is painful in adults, it should be considered painful in newborns. • Healthcare institutions should develop and implement patient care policies to assess, prevent, and manage pain in neonates. • Pharmacologic agents with known pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties and demonstrated efficacy in neonates should be used. Agents known to compromise cardiorespiratory function should be administered only by persons experienced in neonatal airway management and in settings with the capacity for continuous monitoring. • Educational programs to increase the skills of healthcare professionals in the assessment and management of stress and pain in neonates should be provided. • Further research is needed to develop and validate neonatal pain assessment tools that are useful in the clinical setting; to determine optimal behavioral and pharmacologic interventions; and to study long-­term effects of pain and pain management. Data from American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Fetus and Newborn, Committee on Drugs, Section on Anesthesiology, Section on Surgery; Canadian Paediatric Society, Fetus and Newborn Committee. Prevention and Management of Pain and Stress in the Neonate: An Update. Pediatrics 2016;137:e20154271. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1056  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant 121.4  Hypocalcemia Kathleen A. Gibbs and Eric C. Eichenwald Hypocalcemia in a neonate can manifest as irritability, jitteriness, clonus, or seizures. Electrocardiography can show a prolonged QT interval. The cause may simply represent an exaggerated physiologic decrease in serum calcium levels within the first 24 hours of life or pathologic conditions such as genetic disorders (22q deletions), pre- maturity, growth restriction, perinatal hypoxia, hypomagnesemia, or maternal diabetes. Hypocalcemia is more common in term infants receiving formula than in those exclusively receiving breast milk. Most infants remain asymptomatic and can be managed conserva- tively with early nutrition and close monitoring, whereas symptom- atic neonates should receive intravenous or oral calcium replacement. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 121.5  Hypermagnesemia Kathleen A. Gibbs and Eric C. Eichenwald Hypermagnesemia is most often caused by maternal administration of magnesium in the perinatal period for treatment of conditions such as preeclampsia and preterm labor, and as prophylaxis to mitigate brain injury associated with preterm birth. Infants are usually present with signs at birth and improve over the next 24-­48 hours. Symptoms include respiratory depression, hypotonia, lethargy, and feeding intol- erance. No treatment is indicated other than supportive measures. Central nervous system (CNS) disorders are important causes of neo- natal mortality and both short-­term and long-­term morbidity. The CNS can be injured as a result of asphyxia, hemorrhage, trauma, infec- tion, hypoglycemia, or direct cytotoxicity. The etiology of CNS injury is often multifactorial and includes perinatal complications, postnatal hemodynamic instability, and developmental abnormalities that may be genetic and/or environmental. Predisposing factors for brain injury include chronic and acute maternal illness resulting in uteroplacental dysfunction, intrauterine infection, macrosomia/dystocia, malpresen- tation, prematurity, and intrauterine growth restriction. Acute and often unavoidable emergencies during the delivery process may result in mechanical and hypoxic-­ischemic brain injury. 122.1  The Cranium Susan S. Cohen, Alicia J. Sprecher, and Krishna K. Acharya Erythema, abrasions, ecchymoses, and subcutaneous fat necrosis of facial or scalp soft tissues may be noted after a normal delivery or after forceps or vacuum-­assisted deliveries. The location depends on the area of con- tact with the pelvic bones or application of the forceps. Traumatic hemor- rhage may involve any layer of the scalp as well as intracranial contents (Fig. 122.1). Chapter 122 Nervous System Disorders Susan S. Cohen, Alicia J. Sprecher, and Krishna K. Acharya Caput succedaneum is a diffuse, sometimes ecchymotic, edem- atous swelling of the soft tissues of the scalp due to the increased pressure of the vaginal and uterine walls on the fetal head during labor. The pressure causes a serosanguinous/edematous infiltration above the periosteum and below the skin or subcutaneous tissue. The edema is soft and extends across the midline of the skull, crossing suture lines and disappears within the first few days of life. Molding of the head and overriding of the parietal bones are frequently asso- ciated with caput succedaneum and become more evident after the caput has receded; they disappear during the first few weeks of life. Rarely, a hemorrhagic caput may result in shock and require blood transfusion. Analogous swelling, discoloration, and distortion of the face are seen in face presentations. No specific treatment is needed, but if extensive ecchymoses are present, hyperbilirubinemia may develop. Cephalohematoma is a unilateral subperiosteal hemorrhage that does not cross the suture lines as it usually occurs within a single cra- nial plate (Fig. 122.2). Cephalohematomas occur in 1–2% of live births regardless of the mode of delivery. No discoloration of the overlying scalp occurs, and due to slow bleeding, the clinical presentation of swelling is delayed for several hours to days. The lesion becomes a firm, tense mass with a palpable rim localized over one area of the skull. Most cephalohematomas are resorbed within 3 to 4 weeks, depending on their size. They may begin to calcify by the end of the second week of life. A few remain for years as bony protuberances and are detect- able on radiographs as widening of the diploic space; cystlike defects that may persist for months or years. An underlying skull fracture, usually linear and not depressed, may be associated with 10–25% of cases. A sensation of central depression suggesting but not indicative of an underlying fracture or bony defect is usually encountered on pal- pation of the organized rim of a cephalohematoma. Osteomyelitis of the skull is a rare complication of cephalohematoma; Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus are common agents. Cephalohematomas Cephalhematoma Skin Epicranial aponeurosis Periosteum Skull Dura mater Arachnoid Pia mater Subgaleal hemorrhage Extradural hemorrhage Caput Fig. 122.1  Sites of extracranial (and extradural) hemorrhages in the newborn. Schematic diagram of important tissue planes from skin to dura. (From Volpe JJ. Injuries of extracranial, cranial, intracranial, spinal cord, and peripheral nervous system structures. In: Volpe JJ, Inder TE, Darras BT, et al., eds. Volpe’s Neurology of the Newborn. 6th ed. Phila- delphia: Elsevier; 2018: Fig. 36-­1.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 122  u  Nervous System Disorders  1057 require no treatment, although phototherapy may be necessary to treat hyperbilirubinemia. A subgaleal hemorrhage is a collection of blood in the loose con- nective tissue of the subgaleal space, located between the epicranial aponeurosis and the periosteum (see Fig. 122.1). There is often an association with vacuum-­assisted delivery. A subgaleal hemorrhage manifests as a fluctuant mass that straddles cranial sutures or fontanels that increases in size after birth. The mechanism of injury is most likely secondary to rupture of emissary veins connecting the dural sinuses within the skull and the superficial veins of the scalp. Subgaleal hem- orrhages are sometimes associated with skull fractures, suture dias- tasis, and fragmentation of the superior margin of the parietal bone. Extensive subgaleal bleeding can result in sequestration of more than 40% of the newborn’s blood volume, which can potentially result in hemorrhagic shock. The mortality can be up to 14% due to hemor- rhagic shock and is occasionally secondary to a hereditary coagulopa- thy (hemophilia). In some cases, patients can develop a consumptive coagulopathy from massive blood loss. Subgaleal hemorrhages can present clinically with the triad of tachycardia, decreased hematocrit, and increasing occipital frontal circumference. When subgaleal hem- orrhage is suspected, hemoglobin measurements should be performed as soon as possible and should be monitored every 4 to 8 hours, as should coagulation studies. Although it is not necessary to make the clinical diagnosis, optimal imaging for subgaleal hemorrhage is by CT or MRI. Radiographs of the skull can be done to identity accompanying fractures. These lesions typically resolve over 2 to 3 weeks. Fractures of the skull may be caused by pressure in the setting of a forceps delivery, but they can occur rarely in uncomplicated vaginal deliveries. Linear fractures, the most common, cause no symptoms and require no treatment. Linear fractures should be followed up to dem- onstrate healing and to detect the possible complication of a leptomen- ingeal cyst. Depressed fractures often are referred to as “ping-­pong” fractures because on x-­ray they resemble an indented ping-­pong ball. Affected infants may be asymptomatic unless they have associated intra- cranial injury. Surgical management of such an injury may not be neces- sary due to the infants’ relatively thin and flexible skull bones rendering them amenable to remodeling, and intervention could be reserved for larger areas of depression. When intervention is required, the obstet- ric vacuum extractor is an ideal tool because it provides patent tubing unlikely to collapse during the application of suction. No traction is needed during the suction procedure, and the elevation of the depres- sion can be ascertained by direct visualization, an audible “click” sound or a “give” sensation accompanied by an instantaneous pressure release. There is no clear recommendation for imaging in this population, but with newer techniques of low-­dose CT imaging, current technology allows axial imaging to be constructed in the coronal and sagittal planes and into three-­dimensional reformats, thus increasing the likelihood of detecting a fracture. Subconjunctival and retinal hemorrhages are frequent; pete- chiae of the skin of the head and neck are also common. All are probably secondary to a sudden increase in intrathoracic pressure during passage of the chest through the birth canal. Parents should be assured that these hemorrhages are temporary and the result of normal events of delivery. The lesions resolve rapidly within the first 2 weeks of life. 122.2  Neonatal Traumatic Head Injuries Susan S. Cohen, Alicia J. Sprecher, and Krishna K. Acharya Neonatal traumatic head injuries are estimated to affect ∼3% of preg- nancies and represent approximately 2% of neonatal deaths. Infre- quently, these injuries occur during normal birth but the incidence rises in cases when the fetal head is large in proportion to the size of the mother’s pelvic outlet, with prolonged labor, in breech or pre- cipitous deliveries, or as a result of mechanical assistance with deliv- ery. Massive subdural hemorrhage, often associated with tears in the tentorium cerebelli or less frequently in the falx cerebri, is rare, but is encountered more often in full-­term than in premature infants. Patients with massive hemorrhage caused by tears of the tentorium or falx cerebri rapidly deteriorate and may die soon after birth. Most subdural and epidural hemorrhages resolve without intervention. Consultation with a neurosurgeon is recommended. Asymptomatic subdural hemorrhage may be noted within 48 hours of birth after vaginal or cesarean delivery. These are typically small hemorrhages, especially common in the posterior fossa, discovered incidentally in term infants imaged in the neonatal period, and usually of no clini- cal significance. The diagnosis of large subdural hemorrhage may be delayed until the chronic subdural fluid volume expands and produces macrocephaly, frontal bossing, a bulging fontanel, anemia, and some- times seizures. CT scan and MRI are useful imaging techniques to confirm these diagnoses. Symptomatic subdural hemorrhage in term infants can be treated by a neurosurgical evacuation of the subdural fluid collection by a needle placed through the lateral margin of the anterior fontanel, or in severe cases an operative burr hole or crani- otomy. In addition to birth trauma, child abuse must be suspected in all infants with subdural effusion after the immediate neonatal period. Most asymptomatic subdural hemorrhages following labor should resolve by 4 weeks of age. Subarachnoid hemorrhage is often clinically silent in the neonate. Anastomoses between the penetrating leptomeningeal arteries or the A B Fig. 122.2  Parietal cephalhematoma. Clinical appearance of 10-­day-­old infant delivered with the aid of mid-­forceps. A, Posterior view. B, Right lateral view. Note prominent swelling that extends medially to the sagittal suture, posteriorly to the lambdoid suture, and laterally to the squamosal suture. (From Volpe JJ. Injuries of extracranial, cranial, intracranial, spinal cord, and peripheral nervous system structures. In: Volpe JJ, Inder TE, Darras BT, et al. eds. Volpe’s Neurology of the Newborn. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018: Fig. 36-­3.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1058  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant bridging veins are the most likely source of the bleeding. Most affected infants have no clinical symptoms, but the subarachnoid hemorrhage may be detected because of an elevated number of red blood cells in a lumbar puncture sample. Some infants experience short, benign seizures, which tend to occur on the second day of life. Rarely, an infant has a catastrophic hemorrhage and dies. There are usually no neurologic abnormalities during the acute episode or on follow-­up. Significant neurologic findings should suggest an arteriovenous mal- formation, which can best be detected on CT or MRI. 122.3  Intracranial-­Intraventricular Hemorrhage and Periventricular Leukomalacia Susan S. Cohen, Alicia J. Sprecher, and Krishna K. Acharya Intracranial hemorrhage in preterm infants usually develops sponta- neously. Less frequently, it may be caused by trauma or asphyxia, and rarely, it occurs from a primary hemorrhagic disturbance or congeni- tal cerebrovascular anomaly. The very low birthweight infant (VLBW; birthweight <1,500 g) is at high risk for intracranial hemorrhages, with the risk for severe hemorrhage inversely related to gestational age. Intracranial hemorrhage often involves the ventricles (intraventricu- lar hemorrhage [IVH]) of premature infants delivered spontaneously without apparent trauma. Primary hemorrhagic disturbances and vas- cular malformations are rare and usually give rise to subarachnoid or intracerebral hemorrhage. In utero hemorrhage associated with mater- nal idiopathic or, more often, fetal alloimmune thrombocytopenia may appear as severe cerebral hemorrhage or as a porencephalic cyst after resolution of a fetal cortical hemorrhage. Intracranial bleeding may be associated with disseminated intravascular coagulation, isoimmune thrombocytopenia, and neonatal vitamin K deficiency, especially in infants born to mothers receiving phenobarbital or phenytoin. Periventricular leukomalacia (PVL) is a disorder of the periven- tricular cerebral white matter that may be cystic or diffuse in nature. PVL may initially be observed during the first week of life in the VLBW infant as increased echogenicity of the periventricular white matter, sometime described as an echogenic “blush” or “flare.” These areas of white matter abnormalities may become cystic on ultrasonography within 2 to 5 weeks and/or lead to ventriculomegaly from white matter volume loss, which can be visible on repeat ultrasonography at term equivalent age. Clinical risk factors for PVL include gestational age at birth and prenatal/postnatal factors including inflammation, hypoxia, postnatal steroid exposure, and metabolic disturbances. EPIDEMIOLOGY The overall incidence of IVH has decreased over the last few decades as a result of improved perinatal care, increased use of antenatal cor- ticosteroids, surfactant to treat respiratory distress syndrome (RDS), and improved positive pressure mechanical ventilation strategies. The global incidence of IVH among preterm infants ranges from 14.7– 44.7% with considerable variation across gestational age groups, neona- tal intensive care units (NICUs), and countries. The risk for severe IVH is associated with infants with a gestational age ≤30 weeks’ gestation, with the highest risk in infants born at ≤24 weeks’ gestation. Infants born at >30 weeks’ gestation have a low risk of severe IVH unless they have additional clinical risk factors such as low Apgar scores, metabolic acidosis, hypotension, or lack of antenatal steroids. PVL can be described in three major pathologic forms: macroscopic cystic white matter injury, microscopic cystic white matter injury, and nonnecrotic diffuse white matter injury. Macroscopic cystic white matter injury represents the most severe form of PVL and fortunately affects <5% of very preterm infants born <32 weeks. With advances in neonatal care, there has been a shift from large cystic injury to small punctate injury. In microscopic cystic white matter injury, the necrotic areas are small and result in focal areas of gliosis, which ultrasonogra- phy is not sensitive enough to detect. The most common form of PVL in the preterm population is nonnecrotic diffuse PVL. Diffuse PVL is estimated to affect nearly a third of infants born <32 weeks and is best recognized on MRI. PATHOGENESIS The major neuropathologic lesions associated with VLBW infants are IVH and PVL. IVH in premature infants occurs in the gelatinous subependymal germinal matrix. This periventricular area is the site of origin for embryonal neurons and fetal glial cells, which migrate outwardly to the cortex. Immature and fragile blood vessels in this highly vascular region of the developing brain combined with distur- bances in cerebral blood flow and coagulation predispose premature infants to hemorrhage. The germinal matrix involutes as the infant approaches 34 to 36 weeks’ gestation, and the tissue’s vascular integrity improves; therefore IVH is much less common in the late preterm and term infant. The cerebellum also contains a germinal matrix and is sus- ceptible to hemorrhagic injury. Periventricular hemorrhagic infarc- tion (PVHI), previously known as grade IV IVH, often develops after a large IVH because of venous congestion. PVHI is not an exten- sion of the IVH into the parenchyma. Predisposing factors for IVH include prematurity, RDS, hypoxia-­ischemia, exaggerated fluctuations in cerebral blood flow (hypotensive injury, hypervolemia, hyperten- sion), reperfusion injury of damaged vessels, reduced vascular integ- rity, increased venous pressure (pneumothorax, venous thrombus), or thrombocytopenia. The pathogenesis of PVL appears to involve both intrauterine and postnatal events. A complex interaction exists between the develop- ment of the cerebral vasculature and the regulation of cerebral blood flow (both of which depend on gestational age), disturbances in the oligodendrocyte precursors required for myelination, and maternal/ fetal infection and inflammation. Postnatal hypoxia or hypoten- sion, necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) with its resultant inflamma- tion, and severe neonatal infection may all result in white matter injury. The risk for PVL increases in infants with severe IVH or ventriculomegaly. CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS Most infants with IVH, including some with moderate to severe hem- orrhages, have no initial clinical signs (silent IVH). Some premature infants with severe IVH may have an acute deterioration on the second or third day of life (catastrophic IVH). Hypotension, apnea, pallor, stupor or coma, seizures, decreased muscle tone, metabolic acidosis, shock, and decreased hematocrit (or failure of hematocrit to increase after transfusion) may be the first clinical indications. A saltatory pro- gression may occur over several hours to days and manifest as intermit- tent or progressive alterations of levels of consciousness, abnormalities of tone and movement, respiratory signs, and eventually other features of the acute catastrophic IVH. Rarely, IVH may manifest at birth or even prenatally; the majority of cases of IVH in the preterm infant occur within the first 3 days of life. Of those, approximately 50% of hemorrhages occur within the first 5 hours, 70% occur within the first day of life, and by 7 days of life 95% of IVH will have occurred. A small percentage of infants have late hemorrhage, between days 14 and 30. IVH as a primary event is rare after the first month of life. The severity of hemorrhage is defined by the location and degree of bleeding and ventricular dilation on cranial imaging. In a grade I hemor- rhage, bleeding is isolated to the subependymal area. In grade II hemor- rhage, there is bleeding within the ventricle without evidence of ventricular dilation. Grade III hemorrhage is IVH with ventricular dilation. In PVHI hemorrhage (formerly called grade IV, see previously), there is intra- ventricular and parenchymal hemorrhage (Fig. 122.3). Another grading system describes three levels of increasing severity of IVH detected on ultrasound: In grade I, bleeding is confined to the germinal matrix–sub- ependymal region or to <10% of the ventricle (approximately 35% of IVH cases); grade II is defined as intraventricular bleeding with 10–50% filling of the ventricle (40% of IVH cases); and in grade III, >50% of the ventricle is involved, with dilated ventricles (see Fig. 122.3). One of the major complications resulting from IVH is the development of posthemorrhagic ventricular dilation (PHVD). Following a large IVH, multiple small clots throughout the ventricular system may obstruct Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 122  u  Nervous System Disorders  1059 cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) flow and resorption, all in the face of ongoing production of CSF in the choroid plexus in the lateral ventricles and the roof of the third ventricle. The progressive accumulation of CSF changes the shape of the lateral ventricles from a slit to a balloon. The expanding ventricles distort the developing brain and intracerebral pressure (ICP) eventually starts to rise. As the preterm skull is very compliant, the ven- tricles can expand without pressure rising initially but eventually can result in increased ICP. PHVD develops in 30–50% of infants with severe IVH and is initially asymptomatic in most patients. Therefore sequential cranial ultrasonography facilitates early detection. The term ventriculomegaly is occasionally used for both infants with ventricular enlargement follow- ing IVH as well as those without hemorrhage. In infants without IVH, ventricular enlargement is more likely due to white matter loss rather than an accumulation of CSF. Therefore it is preferable to use the term PHVD when ventricular enlargement follows IVH. PVL is usually clinically asymptomatic until the neurologic sequelae of white matter damage become apparent in later infancy as spasticity and/or motor deficits. PVL may be present at birth but usually occurs later, when the echodense phase is seen on ultrasound (3 to 10 days of life), followed by the typical echolucent/cystic phase (14 to 20 days). DIAGNOSIS Intracranial hemorrhage is suspected on the basis of history, clinical manifestations, and knowledge of the birthweight-­specific risks for IVH. Associated clinical signs of IVH are typically nonspecific or absent. Neu- roimaging recommendations that premature infants ≤30 weeks of gesta- tion and selected infants with gestational age >30 weeks who are believed to be at increased risk for brain injury on the basis of identified risk fac- tors should be screened for IVH with cranial ultrasonography. Standard ultrasonography screening includes views from the anterior and mastoid fontanelles. Additional posterior fontanelle and vascular imaging can be performed for additional information. Routine cranial ultrasonographic screening is recommended by 7 to 10 days of age, but earlier imaging may be warranted if clinical signs and symptoms are suggestive of signifi- cant injury. Repeat cranial ultrasonography screening is recommended to be performed at 4 to 6 weeks of age and at term equivalent age or before hospital discharge. CT is not considered a part of routine imag- ing techniques of the preterm brain. MRI for infants born ≤30 weeks gestational age is not indicated as a routine procedure, although could be offered to families of high-­risk infants after a conversation about the limits of prognosticating long-­term outcomes using MRI. COR LOGIQ E9 LOGIQ E9 LOGIQ E9 LOGIQ E9 LOGIQ E9 LOGIQ E9 LOGIQ E9 LOGIQ E9 SAG LT SAG RIGHT SAG RT SAG RT COR COR COR A B C D Fig. 122.3  Grading of the severity of germinal matrix–intraventricular hemorrhage (IVH): coronal (COR) and parasagittal (SAG) ultrasound scans. A, Germinal matrix hemorrhage, grade I. B, IVH (filling <50% of ventricular area), grade II. C, IVH with ventricular dilatation, grade III. D, Large IVH with associated parenchymal echogenicity (hemorrhagic infarct), grade IV. Note that the terminology has now changed for “grade IV” to periventricular hemorrhagic infarction (PVHI). (From Inder TE, Perlman JM, Volpe JJ. Preterm intraventricular hemorrhage/posthemorrhagic hydrocephalus. In: Volpe JJ, Inder TE, Darras BT, et al., eds. Volpe’s Neurology of the Newborn. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018: Fig. 24-­2.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1060  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant Sequential ultrasonography appears to have the best yield for iden- tifying lesions associated with cerebral palsy. In one study, 29% of low birthweight (LBW) infants who later experienced cerebral palsy did not have radiographic evidence of PVL until after 28 days of age. Ultra- sound also detects the precystic and cystic symmetric lesions of PVL and the asymmetric intraparenchymal echogenic lesions of cortical hemorrhagic infarction (Fig. 122.4). Cranial ultrasonography may be useful in monitoring delayed development of cortical atrophy, poren- cephaly, and the severity, progression, or regression of posthemor- rhagic hydrocephalus (PHH). PHH of prematurity is a common form of pediatric hydrocephalus, accounting for 20% of shunted hydrocephalus in the United States. Under normal conditions, CSF is primarily secreted into the cerebral ventricles by the choroid plexus and moves via bulk flow through the ventricular system and subarachnoid space before being absorbed at the arachnoid villi/granulations, which are fully developed after 35 weeks. An increase in CSF production or reduction in CSF absorption may result in ventricular enlargement if the system cannot compen- sate for the changes. Secondary white matter injury resulting from ventricular dilation is likely exacerbated by compression and ischemia from increased ICP of symptomatic PHH. Orbitofrontal head circum- ference, fontanel fullness, and the splaying of sutures all show limited reliability; therefore serial neuroimaging is highly valuable for clinical decision-­making for neurosurgical intervention. PROGNOSIS The degree of IVH and presence of PVL are strongly linked to sur- vival and neurodevelopmental impairment (Tables 122.1 and 122.2). For infants with birthweight <1,000 g, the incidence of severe neuro- logic impairment (defined as Bayley Scales of Infant Development IV mental developmental index <70, psychomotor development index <70, cerebral palsy, blindness, or deafness) after IVH is highest with grade IV hemorrhage and lower birthweight. PVL, cystic PVL, and progressive hydrocephalus requiring shunt insertion are each inde- pendently associated with a poorer prognosis (Table 122.3). The risk of a poor neurodevelopmental outcome is significantly higher when severe IVH is complicated with PHVD (40–60%) and more so for infants who eventually develop PHH (75–88%). In the pre-­surfactant era, up to 82% of infants with PHH who survived developed significant neurologic impairments with cerebral palsy being the most common clinical sequelae (74%). The Drainage, Irrigation, Fibrinolytic Therapy (DRIFT) trial performed neurocognitive assessments at both 2 years and 10 years after birth and demonstrated improved cognitive abil- ity when considering birthweight, IVH grade, and sex. Infants who received DRIFT were almost twice as likely to survive without severe cognitive disability than those who received standard treatment. The Fig. 122.4  Severe cystic periventricular leukomalacia. A, Parasagittal ultrasound image showing numerous large cysts superolateral to the lateral ventricle (arrow). B, Coronal T2 weighted MR image in which cysts are present superolateral to the lateral ventricles (arrow). (From Neil JJ, Volpe JJ. Encephalopathy of prematurity: clinical-­neurological features, diagnosis, imaging, prog- nosis, therapy. In: Volpe JJ, Inder TE, Darras BT, et al., eds. Volpe’s Neurology of the Newborn. 6th ed. Phila- delphia: Elsevier; 2018: Fig. 16-­1.) A B Table 122.1     Short-­Term Outcome of Germinal Matrix–Intraventricular Hemorrhage as a Function of Severity of Hemorrhage and Birthweight* SEVERITY OF HEMORRHAGE DEATHS IN FIRST 14 DAYS PVD (SURVIVORS >14 DAYS) <750 g (n = 75) 751-­1500 g (n = 173) <750 g (n = 56) 751-­1500 g (n = 165) Grade I 3/24 (12) 0/80 (0) 1/21 (5) 3/80 (4) Grade II 5/21 (24) 1/44 (2) 1/16 (6) 6/43 (14) Grade III 6/19 (32) 2/26 (8) 10/13 (77) 18/24 (75) Grade III and apparent PVHI 5/11 (45) 5/23 (22) 5/6 (83) 12/18 (66) *Values are n (%). Deaths occurring later in the neonatal period are not shown; the total mortality rates (early and late deaths) are approximately 50–100% greater for each grade of hemorrhage and birthweight than those shown in the table for early deaths alone. PVHI, Periventricular hemorrhagic infarction; PVD, progressive ventricular dilation. Adapted from Inder TE, Perlman JM, Volpe JJ. Preterm intraventricular hemorrhage/posthemorrhagic hydrocephalus. In: Volpe JJ, Inder TE, Darras BT, et al., eds. Volpe’s Neurology of the Newborn. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018. Table 24-­15; with data from Murphy BP, Inder TE, Rooks V, Taylor GA, et al. Posthemorrhagic ventricular dilatation in the premature infant: natural history and predictors of outcome. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed. 2002;87:F37–F41. Table 122.2     Long-­Term Outcome: Neurologic Sequelae in Survivors with Germinal Matrix–Intraventricular Hemorrhage as a Function of Severity of Hemorrhage* SEVERITY OF HEMORRHAGE INCIDENCE OF DEFINITE NEUROLOGIC SEQUELAE† (%) Grade I 15 Grade II 25 Grade III 50 Grade III and apparent PVHI 75 *Data are derived from reports published since 2002 and include personal published and unpublished cases. Mean values (to nearest 5%) and considerable variability among studies was apparent, especially for the severe lesions. †Definite neurologic sequelae included principally cerebral palsy or mental retardation, or both. PVHI, Periventricular hemorrhagic infarction. Adapted From Inder TE, Perlman JM, Volpe JJ. Preterm intraventricular hemorrhage/ posthemorrhagic hydrocephalus. In: Volpe JJ, Inder TE, Darras BT, et al. eds. Volpe’s Neurology of the Newborn. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018: Table 24-­16. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 122  u  Nervous System Disorders  1061 Early versus Late Ventricular Intervention Study (ELVIS) trial demon- strated the effectiveness of intervention at a low threshold of ventricu- lar dilation on the outcomes of death and severe neurodevelopmental disability in preterm infants with PHVD. Post hoc analysis of this study demonstrated that infants who went on to having a shunt had better neurodevelopmental outcome scores if interventions were done at a lower threshold. TREATMENT No treatment is available for IVH once it has occurred, and the man- agement is largely symptomatic. Seizures should be treated with anti- convulsant drugs. Anemia and coagulopathy require transfusion with packed red blood cells or fresh-­frozen plasma. Shock and acidosis are treated with fluid resuscitation. Insertion of a ventriculoperitoneal shunt is the preferred method to treat progressive and symptomatic PHH. Some infants require tem- porary CSF diversion before a permanent shunt can be safety inserted. Diuretics and acetazolamide are not effective. Ventricular access devices (reservoirs) and externalized ventricular drains are poten- tial temporizing interventions, although there is an associated risk of infection and puncture porencephaly from injury to the surrounding parenchyma. A ventriculosubgaleal shunt inserted from the ventricle into a surgically created subgaleal pocket provides a closed system for constant ventricular decompression without these additional risk fac- tors. Decompression is regulated by the pressure gradient between the ventricle and the subgaleal pocket. One approach to therapeutic interventions is based on the sever- ity of ultrasonographic dimensions of ventricular size (Table 122.4 and Fig. 122.5) PREVENTION Improved perinatal care is imperative to minimize traumatic brain injury and decrease the risk of preterm delivery. The incidence of traumatic intracranial hemorrhage may be reduced by judicious man- agement of cephalopelvic disproportion and operative delivery. Fetal or neonatal hemorrhage caused by maternal idiopathic thrombocy- topenic purpura or alloimmune thrombocytopenia may be reduced by maternal treatment with corticosteroids, intravenous immuno- globulin (IVIG), fetal platelet transfusion, or cesarean birth. Meticu- lous care of the VLBW infant’s respiratory status and fluid-­electrolyte Table 122.3     Ultrasound Diagnosis of Periventricular Leukomalacia US APPEARANCE TEMPORAL FEATURES NEUROPATHOLOGIC CORRELATION Echogenic foci, bilateral, posterior > anterior First week Necrosis with congestion and/or hemorrhage (size >1 cm) Echolucent foci (“cysts”) 1-­3 weeks Cyst formation secondary to tissue dissolution (size >3 mm) Ventricular enlargement, often with disappearance of “cysts” ≥2-­3 months Deficient myelin formation; gliosis, often with collapse of cyst From Neil JJ, Volpe JJ. Encephalopathy of prematurity: Clinical-­neurological features, diagnosis, imaging, prognosis, therapy. In: Volpe JJ, Inder TE, Darras BT, et al., eds. Volpe’s Neurology of the Newborn. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018: Table 16-­6. Table 122.4     Proposed Risk Stratification and Management of Infants with PHVD Consider alterations in NIRS (i.e., decrease cerebral oxygenation) or Doppler US (i.e., increase in Resistive Index) as additional information that may suggest impairment in cerebral perfusion and more urgent need for intervention. Green Zone Key criteria: Ventricular size with the following • VI ≤97th percentile and • AHW ≤6 mm And Absence of the following clinical criteria: • HC growth >2 cm per week • Separated sutures • Bulging fontanelles Management: • Observation in NICU • cUS twice a week until stable for 2 weeks then every 1-2 weeks until 34 weeks PMA • MRI at term equivalent Yellow Zone Key criteria: Ventricular size with the following • VI >97th percentile and • AHW >6 mm and/or TOD >25 mm And Absence of the following clinical criteria: • HC growth >2 cm per week • Separated sutures • Bulging fontanelles Management: • Referral to a regional center for neurosurgical review • Consider LP 2-3 times • cUS 2-3X a week until stable for 2 weeks then every 1-2 weeks until 34 weeks PMA • Neurosurgical intervention when no stabilization occurs • MRI at term equivalent Key criteria: Ventricular size with the following • VI >97th percentile + 4mm and • AHW >10 mm and/or TOD >25 mm Or Any of the following clinical criteria: • HC growth >2 cm per week • Separated sutures • Bulging fontanelles Management: • Consider LP 2-3 times • Neurosurgical intervention including either temporizing measures or VP shunt • MRI at term equivalent Red Zone VI, ventricular index; AHW, anterior horn width; cUS, cranial ultrasound; TOD, thalamo-occipital distance; LP, lumbar puncture; HC, head circumference; NIRS, near-­infrared spectroscopy; NICU, neonatal intensive care unit; PMA, postmenstrual age. From El-­Dib M, Limbrick DD, Inder T, et al. Management of post-­hemorrhagic ventricular dilation in the infant born preterm. J Pediatr. 2020;226:16–26. Fig. 5. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1062  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant management—avoidance of acidosis, hypocarbia, hypoxia, hypo- tension, wide fluctuations in neonatal blood pressure or Pco2 (and secondarily fluctuation in cerebral perfusion pressure), and pneumo- thorax—are important factors that may affect the risk for development of IVH and PVL. The most important protective factor against the development of IVH is antenatal administration of corticosteroids. A single course of antena- tal corticosteroids is recommended for pregnant people between 24 0/7 weeks and 36 6/7 weeks of gestation who are at risk for preterm delivery within 7 days. It also may be considered for pregnant people starting at 23 weeks of gestion who are at risk for preterm delivery within 7 days, based on the family’s decision regarding resuscitation. A rescue course of corticosteroids could be provided as early as 7 days from the prior dose, if indicated by the clinical scenario. Antenatal administration of magne- sium sulfate was not associated with a reduction in the incidence of IVH, although it has been associated with a reduction in the risk of cerebral palsy. Prophylactic indomethacin showed a significant reduction in the incidence of severe IVH; however, this reduction in severe IVH was not associated with a reduction in severe neurosensory impairment. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 122.4  Hypoxic-­Ischemic Encephalopathy Susan S. Cohen, Alicia J. Sprecher, and Krishna K. Acharya Hypoxemia, a decreased arterial concentration of oxygen, frequently results in hypoxia, or decreased oxygenation to cells or organs. Isch- emia refers to blood flow to cells or organs that is inadequate to main- tain physiologic function. Hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy (HIE) is a leading cause of neonatal brain injury, morbidity, and mortality glob- ally. In the developed world, incidence is estimated at 1-­8 per 1,000 live births, and in the developing world, estimates are as high as 26 per 1,000. Approximately 20–30% of infants with HIE (depending on the sever- ity) die in the neonatal period, and 33–50% of survivors are left with per- manent neurodevelopmental abnormalities (cerebral palsy, decreased intelligence quotient [IQ], learning/cognitive impairment). The great- est risk of adverse outcome is seen in infants with severe fetal acidosis (pH <6.7) (90% death/impairment) and a base deficit >25 mmol/L (72% mortality). Multiorgan failure and insult can occur (Table 122.5). ETIOLOGY Neonatal encephalopathy and seizures, in the absence of major con- genital malformations or metabolic or genetic syndromes, appear to be caused by perinatal events. Brain MRI or autopsy findings in full-­term neonates with encephalopathy demonstrate that 80% have acute inju- ries, <1% have prenatal injuries, and 3% have non–hypoxic-­ischemic diagnoses. Fetal hypoxia may be caused by various disorders in the mother, including (1) inadequate oxygenation of maternal blood from hypoventilation during anesthesia, cyanotic heart disease, respiratory failure, or carbon monoxide poisoning; (2) low maternal blood pres- sure from acute blood loss, spinal anesthesia, or compression of the vena cava and aorta by the gravid uterus; (3) inadequate relaxation of the uterus to permit placental filling as a result of uterine tetany caused by the administration of excessive oxytocin; (4) premature separation of the placenta; (5) impedance to the circulation of blood through the umbilical cord as a result of compression or knotting of the cord; and (6) placental insufficiency from maternal infections, exposures, diabe- tes, toxemia or post­maturity. HW* VI* AHW VA *FHR = VI/HW VH TOD A B Fig. 122.5  Ventricular parameters measured in the (A) coronal and (B) sagittal planes by cranial ultrasonography. AHW, anterior horn width; FHR, frontal horn ratio; HW, hemispheric width; TOD, thalamo-occipital distance; VA, ventricular axis; VH, ventricular height; VI, ventricular index. (From Brouwer MJ, de Vries LS, Pistorius L, et al. Ultrasound measurements of the lateral ventricles in neonates: why, how, and when? A systematic review. Acta Paediatr. 2010;99:1298–306.) Table 122.5     Multiorgan Systemic Effects of Asphyxia SYSTEM EFFECTS Central nervous Hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy, infarction, intracranial hemorrhage, seizures, cerebral edema, hypotonia, hypertonia Cardiovascular Myocardial ischemia, poor contractility, cardiac stunning, tricuspid insufficiency, hypotension Pulmonary Pulmonary hypertension, pulmonary hemorrhage, respiratory distress syndrome Renal Acute tubular or cortical necrosis Adrenal Adrenal hemorrhage Gastrointestinal Perforation, ulceration with hemorrhage, necrosis Metabolic Inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone, hyponatremia, hypoglycemia, hypocalcemia, myoglobinuria Integumentary Subcutaneous fat necrosis Hematologic Disseminated intravascular coagulation Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 122  u  Nervous System Disorders  1063 Placental insufficiency often remains undetected on clinical assess- ment. Intrauterine growth restriction may develop in chronically hypoxic fetuses without the traditional signs of fetal distress. Dop- pler umbilical waveform velocimetry (demonstrating increased fetal vascular resistance) and cordocentesis (demonstrating fetal hypoxia and lactic acidosis) identify a chronically hypoxic infant (see Chapter 117). Uterine contractions may further reduce umbilical oxygenation, depressing the fetal cardiovascular system and CNS and resulting in low Apgar scores and respiratory depression at birth. After birth, hypoxia may be caused by (1) failure of oxygenation as a result of severe forms of cyanotic congenital heart disease or severe pulmonary disease; (2) severe anemia (severe hemorrhage, hemolytic disease); (3) shock severe enough to interfere with the transport of oxy- gen to vital organs from overwhelming sepsis, massive blood loss, and intracranial or adrenal hemorrhage; or (4) failure to breathe after birth because of in utero CNS injury or drug-­induced suppression. PATHOPHYSIOLOGY AND PATHOLOGY The topography of cerebral injury typically correlates with areas of decreased cerebral blood flow and areas of relatively higher metabolic demand, although regional vulnerabilities are impacted by gestational age and severity of insult (Table 122.6). After an episode of hypoxia and isch- emia, anaerobic metabolism occurs and generates increased amounts of lactate and inorganic phosphates. Excitatory and toxic amino acids, par- ticularly glutamatergic mechanism has a role in neurotoxicity. Whether this mechanism involves tissue accumulation of an abnormal amount of glutamate or altered sensitivity to the interaction between glutamate and its endogenous family of receptors (i.e., N-­methyl-­d-­aspartate [NMDA], amino-­3-­hydroxy-­5-­methyl-­4-­isoxazole propionate [AMPA], and kainite) is unknown. However, receptor activation results in a cascade of events that leads to cell death by swelling (oncosis) or apoptosis. Along with these changes in the CNS, there are also potentially exacerbating bioenergetic changes as a result of the circulatory response with increased shunting through the ductus venosus, ductus arteriosus, and foramen ovale, at first trying to maintain perfusion of the brain, heart, and adrenal glands in preference to the lungs, liver, kidneys, and intestine. The pathology of hypoxia-­ischemia in tissues outside the CNS depends on the affected organ and the severity of the injury. Early congestion, fluid leak from increased capillary permeability, and endo- thelial cell swelling may lead to signs of coagulation necrosis and cell death. Congestion and petechiae are seen in the pericardium, pleura, thymus, heart, adrenals, and meninges. Prolonged intrauterine hypoxia may result in inadequate perfusion of the periventricular white matter, resulting in PVL. Pulmonary arteriole smooth muscle hyperplasia may develop, which predisposes the infant to pulmonary hypertension (see Chapter 130). If fetal distress produces gasping, amniotic fluid contents (i.e., meconium, desquamation products, lanugo) may be aspirated into the trachea or lungs with subsequent complications, including pulmonary hypertension and pneumothoraces. CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS At delivery, the presence of meconium-­stained amniotic fluid indicates that fetal distress may have occurred. At birth, affected infants may have neurologic impairment and may fail to breathe spontaneously. Pallor, cyanosis, apnea, a slow heart rate, and unresponsiveness to stimulation are also nonspecific initial signs of potential HIE. During the ensuing hours, infants may be hypotonic, may change from a hypo- tonic to a hypertonic state, or their tone may appear normal (Tables 122.7 and 122.8). Cerebral edema may develop during the next 24 hours and result in profound brainstem depression. During this time, seizure activity may occur; seizures may be severe and refractory to standard doses of anticonvulsants. Although most often a result of the HIE, seizures in asphyxiated newborns may also be caused by vascular events (hemorrhage, arterial ischemic stroke, or sinus venous throm- bosis), metabolic derangements (hypocalcemia, hypoglycemia), CNS infection, and cerebral dysgenesis or genetic disorders (nonketotic hyperglycinemia, vitamin-­dependent epilepsies, channelopathies). Congenital conditions that result in neuromuscular weakness and poor respiratory effort may also result secondarily in neonatal hypoxic brain injury and seizure. Such conditions might include congenital myopa- thies, congenital myotonic dystrophy, or spinal muscular atrophy. In addition to CNS dysfunction, systemic organ dysfunction is noted in up to 80% of affected neonates. Myocardial dysfunction and Table 122.6     Topography of Brain Injury in Term Infants with Hypoxic-­Ischemic Encephalopathy and Clinical Correlates AREA OF INJURY LOCATION OF INJURY CLINICAL CORRELATES LONG-­TERM SEQUELAE Selective neuronal necrosis Entire neuraxis, deep cortical area, brainstem and pontosubicular • Stupor or coma • Seizures • Hypotonia • Oculomotor abnormalities • Suck/swallow abnormalities • Cognitive delay • Cerebral palsy • Dystonia • Seizure disorder • Ataxia • Bulbar and pseudobulbar palsy Parasagittal injury Cortex and subcortical white matter Parasagittal regions, especially posterior • Proximal-­limb weakness • Upper extremities affected > lower extremities • Spastic quadriparesis • Cognitive delay • Visual and auditory processing difficulty Focal ischemic necrosis Cortex and subcortical white matter Vascular injury (usually middle cerebral artery distribution) • Unilateral findings • Seizures common and typically focal • Hemiparesis • Seizures • Cognitive delays Periventricular injury Injury to motor tracts, especially lower extremity • Bilateral and symmetric weakness in lower extremities • More common in preterm infants • Spastic diplegia Adapted from Volpe JJ, ed. Neurology of the Newborn. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2001. Table 122.7     Poor Predictive Variables for Death/Disability After Hypoxic-­Ischemic Encephalopathy • Low (0-­3) 10 min Apgar score • Need for CPR in the delivery room • Delayed onset (≥20 min) of spontaneous breathing • Severe neurologic signs (coma, hypotonia, hypertonia) • Seizures onset ≤12 hr or difficult to treat • Severe, prolonged (∼7 days) EEG findings including burst suppression pattern • Prominent MRI basal ganglia/thalamic lesions • Oliguria/anuria >24 hr • Abnormal neurologic exam ≥14 days CPR, Cardiopulmonary resuscitation; EEG, electroencephalogram. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1064  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant cardiogenic shock, persistent pulmonary hypertension, RDS, gastro- intestinal perforation, and acute kidney and liver injury are associated with perinatal asphyxia secondary to inadequate perfusion (see Table 122.5). The severity of neonatal encephalopathy depends on the duration and timing of injury. The need to define severity is rooted in the need to deter- mine eligibility for therapeutic hypothermia, a treatment that decreases death and disability in moderate to severe HIE. A clinical grading score first proposed by Sarnat and colleagues continues to be a useful tool. Symptoms develop over hours and days, making it important to perform serial neu- rologic examinations (see Tables 122.7 and 122.8). Infants with moderate to severe HIE are characterized by disturbed neurologic function, altered level of consciousness, depressed tone, abnormal reflexes, and difficulty maintaining spontaneous respirations, and seizures. An empirically vali- dated definition of mild HIE within 6 hours uses two steps: the first step is screening for fetal acidosis and acute perinatal events, and the second step has an examiner use a modified Sarnat scoring, which is expanded to include mild in addition to moderate and severe abnormalities. DIAGNOSIS MRI is the most sensitive imaging modality for detecting hypoxic brain injury in the neonate. Although such injury can be detected at various times and with varying pulse sequences, diffusion-­weighted sequences obtained in the first 3-5 days following a presumed senti- nel event are optimal for identifying acute injury (Figs. 122.6-­122.9 and Table 122.9). Severe HIE is characterized on MRI by a central pattern injury that includes the thalamus, posterior limb of the inter- nal capsule, and hippocampus with the most severe HIE resulting in involvement of the entire cortex. Magnetic resonance spectroscopy performed within first 24 hours after birth in a full-­term infant is very sensitive to the severity of HIE-­related brain injury. Elevated lactate/creatine ratio on day 1 of life is a predictor of adverse neuro- logic outcome, whereas absence of lactate predicts a normal outcome. Where MRI is unavailable or prevented by clinical instability, brain CT scans may be helpful in ruling out focal hemorrhagic lesions or large arterial ischemic strokes. Loss of gray-­white differentiation and injury to the basal ganglia in more severe HIE can be detected on CT by experienced readers, but CT often misses more subtle forms of neonatal hypoxic brain injury and results in significant radiation exposure. Ultrasound has limited utility in evaluation of hypoxic injury in the term infant, but it too can be useful for excluding hem- orrhagic lesions or hydrocephalus. Because of factors of size and clin- ical stability, ultrasound is the initial preferred (and sometimes only feasible) modality in evaluation of the preterm infant. Table 122.8     Hypoxic-­Ischemic Encephalopathy in Term Infants SIGNS STAGE 1 (MILD) STAGE 2 (MODERATE) STAGE 3 (SEVERE) Level of consciousness Hyperalert, responds to minimal stimuli Lethargic Stuporous, coma Spontaneous activity Normal or decreased Decreased None Posture Mild flexion of distal joints (fingers, wrist) Distal flexion or complete extension Decerebrated Tone Normal Hypotonia (focal or general) or hypertonia Flaccid or rigid PRIMITIVE REFLEXES 1 2 3 Suck Weak or incomplete Weak or bite Absent Moro reflex Intact, low threshold Incomplete Absent AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM 1 2 3 Pupils Mydriasis Miosis Variable or nonreactive Heart rate Tachycardia Bradycardia Variable heart rate Respirations Hyperventilation Periodic breathing Apnea or requiring ventilation Seizures None Common Decerebration Electroencephalographic findings Normal Low voltage changing to seizure activity Burst suppression to isoelectric Duration <24 hr if progresses; otherwise, may remain normal 24 hr to 14 days Days to weeks Outcome Good Variable Death, severe deficits Adapted from Chalak L, Latremouille S, Mir I, Sánchez PJ, Sant’Anna G. A review of the conundrum of mild hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy: current challenges and moving forward. Early Hum Dev. 2018;120:88–94. A B Fig. 122.6  MR images of selective neuronal injury. The infant experi- enced intrapartum asphyxia and had seizures on the first postnatal day. MRI was performed on the fifth postnatal day. A, Axial, fluid-­attenuated, inversion recovery image shows increased signal in the putamen bi- laterally (arrows) but no definite abnormality in the cerebral cortex. B, By contrast, a diffusion-­weighted image shows striking increased signal intensity (i.e., decreased diffusion) in the frontal cortex (in addition to a more pronounced basal ganglia abnormality). (From Volpe JJ, ed. Neu- rology of the Newborn. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2008. p. 420.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 122  u  Nervous System Disorders  1065 Neurophysiology Studies Monitoring the brain of the sick newborn infant in the NICU using either multichannel electroencephalography (EEG) or limited channel amplitude integrated EEG (aEEG) may help to determine which infants are at highest risk for developmental sequelae of neonatal brain injury (Tables 122.10 and 122.11). Multichannel EEG with video is the gold standard for monitoring newborn brain function; at least 24-­hour monitoring is recommended for infants at risk for seizures. The neonatal EEG contains complex spatiotem- poral information and can be difficult to interpret, requiring many years in neurophysiology training. As a result, in many NICUs, EEG signal pro- cessing of a limited number of channels, with a more accessible method of data presentation, has been adopted (aEEG). Even in the absence of obvious seizures, a 24-­hour multichannel EEG recording is recommended and, in infants undergoing hypothermia therapy, 72 hours is optimal to cover duration of intervention. It is known that EEG in HIE evolves follow- ing the primary HIE injury and that EEG monitoring is essential to assess this evolution and recovery. Description of EEG background grades and seizures in HIE include normal trace, which is a normal amplitude with sleep–wake cycling; mildly abnormal trace, which is a period of low ampli- tude and lack of sleep–wake cycling; moderately abnormal trace, which is periods of discontinuity <10 seconds; and severely abnormal trace with burst suppression pattern and discontinuity of activity for 10-­60 seconds (Fig. 122.10). An aEEG is a good option if multichannel EEG is not avail- able. The signal from biparietal electrodes is smoothed and the amplitude integrated and shows the baseline background electrical activity. A voltage classification scheme for aEEG use in HIE has been developed as follows: normal voltage (5-­10 μV) and abnormal voltage (lower margin <5 μV and upper margin >10 μV). TREATMENT Therapeutic hypothermia, whether head cooling or systemic cooling (by servo-­control to a core rectal or esophageal temperature of 33.5°C [92.3°F] within the first 6 hours after birth and maintained for 72 hours) has been shown to reduce mortality and major neurodevelopmental impairment at 18 months of age. Infants treated with systemic hypo- thermia have a lower incidence of cortical neuronal injury on MRI, suggesting systemic hypothermia may result in more uniform cooling of the brain and deeper CNS structures than selective head cooling. The therapeutic effect of hypothermia likely results from decreased secondary neuronal injury achieved by reducing rates of apoptosis and production of mediators related to neurotoxicity. There is also benefit in seizure reduction. The therapeutic benefit of hypothermia noted at 18-­22 months of age is maintained later in childhood. Once estab- lished, hypothermia may not alter the prognostic findings on MRI. Numerous studies seeking ways to extend the benefits of therapeutic hypothermia have been attempted. The foundational clinical trials of therapeutic hypothermia had strict treatment protocols and excluded infants born before 35 or 36 weeks completed gestational weeks, those weighing <1,800 g, and infants with major congenital abnormality. Practice variation exists for offering therapeutic hypothermia to infants Fig. 122.8  MR image of a parasagittal cerebral injury. Coronal T1 weighted image, obtained on the fifth postnatal day in an asphyxiated term infant, shows striking triangular lesions in the parasagittal areas bi- laterally; increased signal intensity is also apparent in the basal ganglia and thalamus bilaterally. (From Volpe JJ, ed. Neurology of the New- born. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2008. p. 421.) Fig. 122.7  MR images of basal ganglia/thalamic (BG/T) injury and signal intensity. Top row, Axial T1 weighted MR images showing mild BG/T lesions (arrow) (A), moderate BG/T injury (arrows) (B), and severe BG/T abnormalities (circled) (C). Bottom row, Axial T1 weight- ed MR images showing normal signal intensity (SI) in the posterior limb of the internal capsule (PLIC) (arrow) (A), equivocal, asymmetric, and slightly reduced SI in the PLIC (arrow) (B), and abnormal, absent SI in the PLIC (arrow) (C). (From Martinez-­Biarge M, Diez-­Sebastian J, Rutherford MA, Cowan FM. Outcomes after central grey matter injury in term perinatal hypoxic-­ischaemic encephalopathy. Early Hum Dev. 2010;86:675–682.) A B C Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1066  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant who do not meet the original study criteria, although debate for these practices also exist. A multicenter randomized clinical trial investi- gating the benefit of use of therapeutic hypothermia beyond 6 hours after birth reported a modest and “nonconclusive” effect. Importantly, this study extended the duration of hypothermia from 72 to 96 hours based on preclinical data suggesting that a longer period of treatment was needed at later initiation times. Assessment of deeper or longer cooling failed to show benefit in short-­term outcomes, and its use is not supported by evidence nor clinically justifiable. Multicenter clini- cal trials are underway to assess the use of therapeutic hypothermia in preterm infants born between 33 and 35 weeks’ gestation. The term “major congenital anomalies” in the original trials lead to the exclu- sion of numerous conditions with a favorable prognosis for survival and neurodevelopment, including trisomy 21. Unless the identified anomaly specifically imparts a medical contraindication to therapeu- tic hypothermia, the infant is moribund, or treatment does not align with the broader goals of care for the infant, categorical exclusion of the infant from therapeutic hypothermia solely based on the pres- ence of one or more major congenital anomalies is likely not ethically justifiable. There have been few studies to investigate the use of thera- peutic hypothermia in neonates who are beyond the perinatal period. Presently, clinical research on “targeted temperature management” in infants has been done in the pediatric intensive care setting and has little applicability to NICUs. Complications of induced hypothermia include thrombocytope- nia (usually without bleeding), reduced heart rate, and subcutaneous fat necrosis (sometimes with associated hypercalcemia) as well as the potential for overcooling and the cold injury syndrome. The latter is usually avoided with a servo-­controlled cooling system. Therapeutic hypothermia may theoretically alter drug metabolism, prolong the QT interval, and affect the interpretation of blood gases. In clinical prac- tice, these concerns have not been observed. For treating seizures associated with HIE, phenobarbital continues to be used in many instances. It is typically given by intravenous load- ing dose (20 mg/kg). Additional doses of 5-­10 mg/kg (up to 40-­50 mg/kg total) may be needed. Phenobarbital levels should be moni- tored 24 hours after the loading dose has been given and maintenance therapy (5 mg/kg/24 hr) begun. Therapeutic phenobarbital levels are 20-­40 μg/mL. Fig. 122.9  MR images of focal is- chemic cerebral injury. MRI was per- formed on the third postnatal day. A, Axial T2 weighted image shows a le- sion in the distribution of the main branch of the left middle cerebral artery. B, Diffusion-­weighted image demonstrates the lesion more strik- ingly. (From Volpe JJ, ed. Neurology of the Newborn. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2008. p. 422.) A B 100 10 0 aEEG µV CNV DNV BS LV FT Fig. 122.10  Amplitude EEG patterns. Patterns are highlighted with pattern classification (continuous normal voltage [CNV], discontinu- ous normal voltage [DNV], burst suppression [BS], low voltage [LV], flat tracings [FT]). (From Chalak L. New horizons in mild hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy: A standardized algorithm to move past conundrum of care. Clin Perinatol. 2022;49:279–294. Fig. 3.) Table 122.9     Major Aspects of MRI in Diagnosis of Hypoxic-­Ischemic Encephalopathy in the Term Infant MAJOR CONVENTIONAL MR FINDINGS IN FIRST WEEK • Cerebral cortical gray-­white differentiation lost (on T1W or T2W) • Cerebral cortical high signal (T1W and FLAIR), especially in parasagittal peri-­rolandic cortex • Basal ganglia/thalamus, high signal (T1W and FLAIR), usually associated with the cerebral cortical changes but possibly alone with increased signal in brainstem tegmentum in cases of acute severe insult • Parasagittal cerebral cortex, subcortical white matter, high signal (T1W and FLAIR) • Periventricular white matter, decreased signal (T1W) or increased signal (T2W) • Posterior limb of internal capsule, decreased signal (T1W or FLAIR) • Cerebrum in a vascular distribution, decreased signal (T1W), but much better visualized as decreased diffusion (increased signal) on diffusion-­weighted MRI • Diffusion-­weighted MRI more sensitive than conventional sequences in MRI, especially in first days after birth, when former shows decreased diffusion (increased signal) in injured areas FLAIR, Fluid-­attenuated inversion recovery; T1W and T2W, T1 weighted and T2 weighted images. From Volpe JJ, ed. Neurology of the Newborn. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2008: Table 9-­16. Table 122.10     Value of Electroencephalography in Assessment of Asphyxiated Term Infants • Detection of severe abnormalities (i.e., CLV, FT, BSP) in first hours of life has a positive predictive value of an unfavorable outcome of 80–90%. • Severe abnormalities may improve within 24 hr (∼50% of BSP and 10% of CLV/FT). • Rapid recovery of severe abnormalities is associated with a favorable outcome in 60% of cases. • The combination of early neonatal neurologic examination and early aEEG enhances the positive predictive value and specificity. aEEG, Amplitude integrated encephalography; BSP, burst suppression pattern; CLV, continuous low voltage; FT, flat trace. From Inder TE, Volpe JJ. Hypoxic-­ischemic injury in the term infant: clinical-­neurological features, diagnosis, imaging, prognosis, therapy. In: Volpe JJ, Inder TE, Darras BT, et al., eds. Volpe’s Neurology of the Newborn. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018: Table 20-­28. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 122  u  Nervous System Disorders  1067 For refractory seizures, there is a high degree of variability regarding choice of a second agent. Historically, phenytoin (20 mg/kg loading dose) or lorazepam (0.1 mg/kg) have been preferred, but currently the use of levetiracetam is preferred (at times even as a first-­line agent) as a second-­line agent. Pharmacokinetic data suggest that due to the higher volume of distribution created by higher relative body water content in neonates, loading doses should be higher than in older chil- dren or adults. Suggested appropriate loading doses may be closer to 60 mg/kg. In addition to levetiracetam and phenytoin, other second-­ or third-­line agents commonly used include midazolam, topiramate, and lidocaine. Pyridoxine should also be attempted, particularly in ongo- ing refractory seizures with highly abnormal EEG background. Status epilepticus, multifocal seizures, and need for multiple anticonvulsant medications during therapeutic hypothermia are associated with a poor prognosis. Additional therapy for infants with HIE includes supportive care directed at management of organ system dysfunction. Hyperthermia has been associated with impaired neurodevelopment and should be prevented, particularly in the interval between initial resuscita- tion and initiation of hypothermia. Careful attention to ventilatory status and adequate oxygenation, blood pressure, hemodynamic status, acid-­base balance, and possible infection is important. Sec- ondary hypoxia or hypotension from complications of HIE must be prevented. Aggressive treatment of seizures is critical and may necessitate continuous EEG monitoring. In addition, hyperoxia, hypocarbia, and hypoglycemia are associated with poor outcomes, so careful attention to resuscitation, ventilation, and blood glucose homeostasis is essential. PROGNOSIS The outcome of HIE ranges from complete recovery to death. The prognosis varies depending on the severity of the insult and the treat- ment. Infants with initial cord or initial (∼1 hour of age) blood pH <6.7 have a 90% risk for death or severe neurodevelopmental impair- ment at 18 months of age. In addition, infants with Apgar scores of 0-­3 at 5 minutes, high base deficit (>20-­25 mmol/L), decerebrate posture, severe basal ganglia/thalamic (BG/T) lesions (Fig. 122.11; see also Fig. 122.7), persistence of severe HIE by clinical examination at 72 hours, and lack of spontaneous activity are also at increased risk for death or impairment. These predictor variables can be combined to determine a score that helps with prognosis (see Table 122.7). Infants with the highest risk are likely to die or have severe disability despite aggres- sive treatment, including hypothermia. Those with intermediate scores are likely to benefit from treatment. In general, severe encephalopa- thy, characterized by flaccid coma, apnea, absence of oculocephalic reflexes, and refractory seizures, is associated with a poor prognosis (see Table 122.8). Apgar scores alone in patients with HIE can also be associated with subsequent risk of neurodevelopmental impairment. At 10 minutes, each point decrease in Apgar score increases odds of death or disability by 45%. Death or disability occurs in 76–82% of infants with HIE with Apgar scores of 0-­2 at 10 minutes. Absence of spontaneous respirations at 20 minutes of age and persistence of abnor- mal neurologic signs at 2 weeks of age also predict death or severe cog- nitive and motor deficits. The combined use of early multichannel EEG or aEEG and MRI offers additional insight in predicting outcome in term infants with HIE (see Table 122.11). EEG or aEEG background characteristics such as pattern, voltage, reactivity, state change, and evolution after acute injury are important predictors of outcome. MRI markers include loca- tion of injury, identification of injury by certain pulse sequences, mea- surement of diffusivity and/or fractional anisotropy, and presence of abnormal metabolite ratios on MR spectroscopy, and all have shown Table 122.11     Electroencephalographic Patterns of Prognostic Significance in Asphyxiated Term Infants* ASSOCIATED WITH FAVORABLE OUTCOME Mild depression (or less) on day 1 Normal background by day 7 ASSOCIATED WITH UNFAVORABLE OUTCOME Predominant interburst interval >20 sec on any day Burst suppression pattern on any day Isoelectric tracing on any day Mild (or greater) depression after day 12 *Associations with favorable or unfavorable outcome are generally ≥90%, but the clinical context must be considered. From Inder TE, Volpe JJ. Hypoxic-­ischemic injury in the term infant: clinical-­neurological features, diagnosis, imaging, prognosis, therapy. In: Volpe JJ, Inder TE, Darras BT, et al., eds. Volpe’s Neurology of the Newborn. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018: Table 20-­26. Severe BG/T Look at the cortex Look at the pons Normal: 35% Moderate: 50% Severe: 90% 90% will have some feeding problems. Gastrostomy 95% will have some speech problems, severe in most 50%–75% will have some grade of visual impairment, especially with moderate-severe white matter and brain stem injury Children are in general difficult to assess because of their motor impairment at this age Normal: 25%–30% Mild: 45%–50% Moderate: 60% Severe: 75% Cerebral palsy 98% Mostly severe (95%) Feeding Speech and language Vision DQ Seizures Fig. 122.11  Flow chart showing patterns of outcome with severe basal ganglia/thalamic (BG/T) injury. DQ, Developmental quotient. (From Martinez-­Biarge M, Diez-­Sebastian J, Rutherford MA, Cowan FM. Outcomes after central grey matter injury in term perinatal hypoxic-­ischaemic encephalopathy. Early Hum Dev. 2010;86:675–682.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1068  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant correlation with outcome. Severe BG/T lesions with abnormal signal in the posterior limb of the internal capsule are highly predictive of the poorest cognitive and motor prognosis (see Fig. 122.11). Normal MRI and EEG findings are associated with a good recovery. Microcephaly and poor head growth during the first year of life also correlate with injury to the BG/T and white matter and adverse developmental outcome at 12 months. All survivors of moderate to severe encephalopathy require comprehensive high-­risk medical and developmental follow-­up. Early identification of neurodevelopmental problems allows prompt referral for developmental, rehabilitative, and neurologic early intervention services so that the best possible out- comes can be achieved. Brain death (death by neurologic criteria) after neonatal HIE is diagnosed from the clinical findings of coma unresponsive to pain, auditory, or visual stimulation; apnea with Pco2 rising from 40 to >60 mm Hg without ventilatory support; and absence of brainstem reflexes (pupillary, oculocephalic, oculovestibular, corneal, gag, sucking) (see Chapter 83). These findings must occur in the absence of hypother- mia, hypotension, and elevations of depressant drugs (phenobarbital), which may take days to be metabolized and cleared completely from the blood. In the term infant, the national guideline for determination should be followed. There is no agreement on such criteria in the pre- term infants. Consideration of withdrawal of life support must include discussions with the family and the healthcare team, and, if there is dis- agreement, an ethics committee. The best interest of the infant involves judgments about the benefits and harm of continuing therapy or avoid- ing ongoing futile therapy. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 122.5  Spine and Spinal Cord Susan S. Cohen, Alicia J. Sprecher, and Krishna K. Acharya See also Chapter 751. Injury to the spine/spinal cord during birth is rare but can be dev- astating. Strong traction exerted when the spine is hyperextended or when the direction of pull is lateral, or forceful longitudinal traction on the trunk while the head is still firmly engaged in the pelvis, espe- cially when combined with flexion and torsion of the vertical axis, may produce fracture and separation of the vertebrae. Such injuries are most likely to occur when difficulty is encountered in delivering the shoulders in cephalic presentations and the head in breech pre- sentations. The injury occurs most often at the level of the 4th cervi- cal vertebra with cephalic presentations and the lower cervical–upper thoracic vertebrae with breech presentations. Transection of the cord may occur with or without vertebral fractures; hemorrhage and edema may produce neurologic signs that are indistinguishable from those of transection, except that they may not be permanent. Areflexia, loss of sensation, and complete paralysis of voluntary motion occur below the level of injury, although the persistence of a withdrawal reflex mediated through spinal centers distal to the area of injury is frequently misin- terpreted as representing voluntary motion. If the injury is severe, the infant, who from birth may be in poor condi- tion because of respiratory depression, shock, or hypothermia, may dete- riorate rapidly to death within several hours before any neurologic signs are obvious. Alternatively, the course may be protracted, with symptoms and signs appearing at birth or later in the first week; Horner syndrome, immobility, flaccidity, and associated brachial plexus injuries may not be recognized for several days. Constipation may also be present. Some infants survive for prolonged periods, their initial flaccidity, immobil- ity, and areflexia being replaced after several weeks or months by rigid flexion of the extremities, increased muscle tone, and spasms. Apnea on day 1 and poor motor recovery by 3 months are poor prognostic signs. The differential diagnosis of neonatal spine/spinal cord injury includes amyotonia congenita and myelodysplasia associated with spina bifida occulta, spinal muscular atrophy (type 0), spinal vascular malformations (e.g., arteriovenous malformation causing hemorrhage or stroke), and congenital structural anomalies (syringomyelia, heman- gioblastoma). Ultrasound or MRI confirms the diagnosis. Treatment of the survivors is supportive, including home ventilation; patients often remain permanently disabled. When a fracture or dislocation is caus- ing spinal compression, the prognosis is related to the time elapsed before the compression is relieved. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 122.6  Peripheral Nerve Injuries Susan S. Cohen, Alicia J. Sprecher, and Krishna K. Acharya See also Chapter 753. BRACHIAL PALSY Brachial plexus injury is a common problem, with an incidence of 0.6-­ 4.6 per 1,000 live births. Injury to the brachial plexus may cause paraly- sis of the upper part of the arm with or without paralysis of the forearm or hand or, more often, paralysis of the entire arm. These injuries occur in macrosomic infants and when lateral traction is exerted on the head and neck during delivery of the shoulder in a vertex presentation, when the arms are extended over the head in a breech presentation, or when excessive traction is placed on the shoulders. The primary risk factor for brachial plexus injuries are shoulder dystocia and macrosomia (birthweight >4,000 g). Erb-­Duchenne paralysis results from injury to the nerve roots of the 5th and 6th cervical nerves, with the 7th affected in 50% of instances. The infant loses the power to abduct the arm from the shoulder, rotate the arm externally, and supinate the forearm. The characteristic posi- tion consists of adduction and internal rotation of the arm with prona- tion of the forearm, often described as the “waiter’s tip hand.” Power to extend the forearm is retained, but the biceps reflex is absent; the Moro reflex is absent on the affected side (Fig. 122.12). The outer aspect of the arm may have some sensory impairment. Power in the forearm and hand grasps is preserved unless the lower part of the plexus is also injured; the presence of hand grasp is a favorable prognostic sign. When the injury includes the phrenic nerve (in about 5% of patients), alteration in diaphragmatic excursion may be observed with ultra- sound, fluoroscopy, or as asymmetric elevation of the diaphragm on chest radiograph. Klumpke paralysis is a rare form of brachial palsy in which injury to the 7th and 8th cervical nerves and the 1st thoracic nerve produces a paralyzed hand and ipsilateral ptosis and miosis (Horner syndrome) if the sympathetic fibers of the first thoracic root are also injured. The incidence is as low as 0.6%, and some suggest the reason for this is mod- ern obstetric practice and a sharp decline in the vaginal breech deliver- ies where there is a risk of hyperabduction of the arms. Mild cases may not be detected immediately after birth. Differentiation must be made from cerebral injury; from fracture, dislocation, or epiphyseal separa- tion of the humerus; and from fracture of the clavicle. MRI demon- strates nerve root rupture or avulsion. Most patients have full recovery. If the paralysis was a result of edema and hemorrhage around the nerve fibers, function should return within a few months; if it resulted from laceration, permanent damage may result. Involvement of the deltoid is usually the most seri- ous problem and may result in shoulder drop secondary to muscle atrophy. In general, paralysis of the upper part of the arm has a better prognosis than paralysis of the lower part. Treatment for peripheral nerve injuries consists of initial conser- vative management with monthly follow-­up and a decision for sur- gical intervention by 3 months if function has not improved. Partial immobilization and appropriate positioning are used to prevent the development of contractures. In upper arm paralysis, the arm should be abducted 90 degrees with external rotation at the shoulder, full supination of the forearm, and slight extension at the wrist with the palm turned toward the face. This position may be achieved with a brace or splint during the first 1-­2 weeks. Immobilization should be intermittent throughout the day while the infant is asleep and between Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 122  u  Nervous System Disorders  1069 feedings. In lower arm or hand paralysis, the wrist should be splinted in a neutral position and padding placed in the fist. When the entire arm is paralyzed, the same treatment principles should be followed. Gentle massage and range-­of-­motion exercises may be started by 7-­10 days of age. Infants should be closely monitored with active and passive corrective exercises. If the paralysis persists without improvement for 3 months, neuroplasty, neurolysis, end-­to-­end anastomosis, and nerve grafting offer hope for partial recovery. The type of treatment and the prognosis depend on the mecha- nism of injury and the number of nerve roots involved. The mildest injury to a peripheral nerve (neurapraxia) is caused by edema and heals spontaneously within a few weeks. Axonotmesis is more severe and is a consequence of nerve fiber disruption with an intact myelin sheath; function usually returns in a few months. Total disruption of nerves (neurotmesis) or root avulsion is the most severe, especially if it involves C5-­T1; microsurgical repair may be indicated. Fortunately, most (75%) injuries are at the root level C5-­C6, involve neurapraxia and axonotmesis, and should heal spontaneously. Botulism toxin may be used to treat biceps-­triceps co-­contractions. PHRENIC NERVE PARALYSIS Phrenic nerve injury (3rd, 4th, 5th cervical nerves) with diaphragmatic paralysis must be considered when cyanosis and irregular and labored respirations develop. Such injuries, usually unilateral, are associated with ipsilateral upper brachial plexus palsies in 75% of cases. Because breathing is thoracic in type, the abdomen does not bulge with inspira- tion. Breath sounds are diminished on the affected side. The thrust of the diaphragm, which may often be felt just under the costal margin on the normal side, is absent on the affected side. The diagnosis is estab- lished by ultrasound or fluoroscopic examination, which reveals eleva- tion of the diaphragm on the paralyzed side and seesaw movements of the two sides of the diaphragm during respiration. It may also be apparent on chest or abdominal radiograph. Infants with phrenic nerve injury should be placed on the involved side and given oxygen if necessary. Some may benefit from pressure introduced by continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) to expand the paralyzed hemidiaphragm. In extreme cases, mechanical ventila- tion may be needed. Initially, intravenous feedings may be needed; later, progressive gavage or oral feeding may be started, depending on the infant’s condition. Pulmonary infections are a serious complica- tion. If the infant fails to demonstrate spontaneous recovery in 1-­2 months, surgical plication of the diaphragm may be indicated. FACIAL NERVE PALSY Facial palsy is usually a peripheral paralysis that results from pressure over the facial nerve in utero, during labor, or from forceps use during delivery. Rarely, it may result from nuclear agenesis of the facial nerve. Peripheral facial paralysis is flaccid and, when complete, involves the entire side of the face, including the forehead. The main reported risk factors associated with traumatic facial paralysis are primigravida, birth- weight >3,500 g, forceps usage, cesarean birth, and prematurity. When the infant cries, movement occurs only on the nonparalyzed side of the face, and the mouth is drawn to that side. On the affected side the fore- head is smooth, the eye cannot be closed, the nasolabial fold is absent, and the corner of the mouth droops. Central facial paralysis spares the forehead (e.g., forehead wrinkles will still be apparent on the affected side) because the nucleus that innervates the upper face has overlapping dual innervation by corticobulbar fibers originating in bilateral cerebral hemispheres. The infant with central facial paralysis usually has other manifestations of intracranial injury, most often 6th nerve palsy from the proximity of the 6th and 7th cranial nerve nuclei in the brainstem. Prognosis depends on whether the nerve was injured by pressure or the nerve fibers were torn; improvement occurs within a few weeks in the former case. The majority of infants with traumatic facial nerve palsy will recover within the first 2 months of life. Care of the exposed eye is essen- tial. Neuroplasty may be indicated when the paralysis is persistent. Facial palsy may be confused with absence of the depressor muscles of the mouth, which is a benign problem or with variants of Möbius syndrome. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Fig. 122.12  Schematic representation of the brachial plexus with its terminal branches. The major sites of bra- chial plexus injury are shown. (Courtesy Netter Images, Image ID 19943. www.netterimages.com.) White ramus communicans (fibers to cervical sympathetic trunk) Injuries of upper brachial plexus or its nerve roots (C5, C6) cause Erb’s palsy Injuries of lower brachial plexus or its nerve roots (C7, C8; T1) cause Klumpke’s palsy and often Horner’s syndrome Injuries of C4 root may cause phrenic nerve paralysis and respiratory distress Infant with Erb’s palsy on right side. Muscles of shoulder and upper arm chiefly affected. Elbow extended and wrist flexed, but grasp normal Musculocutaneous n. Axillary n. Radial n. Median n. Ulnar n. Young girl with Klumpke’s palsy on right side. Muscles of forearm and hand chiefly affected. Grasp weak and affected limb small. Horner’s syndrome present, due to interruption of fibers to cervical sympathetic trunk phrenic nerve C3 C4 C5 C6 C7 C8 T1 Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1070  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant Most infants complete the transition to extrauterine life without difficulty; however, a small proportion require resuscitation after birth (Fig. 123.1). For a newborn infant, the need for resuscita- tion is often caused by a respiratory problem leading to inadequate ventilation. This is in contrast to an adult cardiac arrest, which is usually caused by inadequate circulation. The goals of neonatal resuscitation are to establish adequate spontaneous respirations, obtain adequate cardiac output, and prevent the morbidity and mortality associated with hypoxic-­ischemic tissue (brain, heart, kidney) injury (see Chapter 122). High-­risk situations should be anticipated from pregnancy history and labor. Improved perinatal care and prenatal diagnosis of fetal anomalies allow for appropriate maternal transports for high-­risk deliveries. Infants who are born limp, cyanotic, apneic, or pulseless require immediate resuscitation before assignment of the 1 minute Apgar score. Rapid and appropri- ate resuscitative efforts improve the likelihood of preventing brain damage and achieving a successful outcome. NEONATAL RESUSCITATION See also Chapter 79. Recommendations for the Neonatal Resuscitation Program (NRP) propose an integrated assessment/response approach for the initial evaluation of an infant, consisting of simultaneous assessment of infant general appearance and risk factors. The fundamental principles include evaluation of the airway and establishing effective respirations and adequate circulation. The guidelines also highlight the importance of the neonatal heart rate as a primary indicator of the need for and response to resuscitation. Before the birth of a baby, sufficient preparation for the birth should occur. At least one individual capable of initiating neonatal resusci- tation should be present at the delivery. If advanced resuscitation is anticipated, more providers should be available. Necessary equipment should be available, which routinely includes a warmer bed, blankets, infant hat, stethoscope, bulb suction, suction catheter with wall suc- tion, bag-­mask device, oxygen source with blender, pulse oximeter, laryngoscope with blade, endotracheal tubes (ETTs), laryngeal mask airway, pulse oximeter, and electrocardiogram (ECG) leads. Based on the specific details of the pregnancy, further equipment may be needed and should be readily available. The equipment should be checked to make sure it is functioning appropriately. Team members should intro- duce themselves, define a team leader, assign roles for the resuscitation, and discuss what actions they will take during the resuscitation. For complex resuscitations, there may be one individual whose sole job is to document the resuscitation by keeping track of time and record- ing interventions performed. This can help ensure the correct steps are performed in a timely manner and inform the team debriefing after resuscitation. The umbilical cord management plan should be established before delivery. Delayed cord clamping after birth can be per- formed in both preterm and term infants. Benefits to term infants include higher hemoglobin levels at birth with improved iron stores in infancy. Benefits for preterm infants include improved hemodynamic stability, decreased need for inotropic support, and decreased red blood cell transfusions. The 2020 Neonatal Resus- citation Guidelines call for at least 30-­60 seconds of delayed cord clamping after birth for vigorous term and preterm infants unless contraindications are present. It is unclear whether delayed cord clamping should be continued when an infant requires resusci- tation; this is an area of active research. Umbilical cord milking should not be performed for extremely preterm infants <28 weeks’ gestation because this has been associated with an increased risk of intraventricular hemorrhage. Failure to initiate or sustain respiratory effort at birth is fairly com- mon, with 5–10% of newborns requiring some intervention. Infants with primary apnea respond to stimulation by establishing normal breathing. Infants with secondary apnea require ventilatory assistance to establish spontaneous respiratory effort. Secondary apnea usually originates as a result of prolonged interruption of adequate oxygen delivery in the perinatal period. Immediately after birth, all term infants should be dried, warmed, and stimulated. If the infant does not need resuscitation, these steps can occur on the mother’s abdomen while delayed cord clamping is taking place. Simultaneously, the infant’s tone, respiratory effort, and heart rate should be assessed (Fig. 123.2). If the infant remains apneic or bradycardic (heart rate is <100 beats/min) after stimulation, posi- tive pressure ventilation (PPV) should be given via face mask. PPV should be initiated at peak inspiratory pressures of approximately 20 cm H2O, positive end-­expiratory pressures of 5 cm H2O at a rate of 40-­60 breaths/min. At the same time PPV is initiated, a pulse oximeter should be placed on the right hand (preductal). Resuscitation with room air in term infants is effective and may reduce the risk of hyperoxia, which is associated with decreased cerebral blood flow and gen- eration of oxygen free radicals. Room air, which is 21% fraction of inspired oxygen (Fio2), is the preferred initial gas for neonatal resuscitation in infants ≥35 weeks. O2 concentration should then be titrated as needed to meet targeted peripheral oxygen saturations (>80% by 5 minutes), as defined by normal reference range by min- ute of life (see Fig. 123.2; see the following section on “Resuscitation of the Preterm Infant”). The most important sign of effective ventilation is a rise in heart rate. Additional signs include adequate chest rise, symmetric breath sounds, increasing O2 saturation, spontaneous respirations, and improved tone. If after 30 seconds of providing PPV there is no response in heart rate, corrective steps should be performed to improve ventilation. The six Chapter 123 Neonatal Resuscitation ­and Delivery Room Emergencies Heidi M. Herrick and Elizabeth E. Foglia 136 million babies born Approx 10 million babies Approx 6 million babies <1% of babies require advanced resuscitation (endotracheal intubation, chest compressions and drugs) Approx 3-6% of babies require basic resuscitation (bag-and-mask ventilation) Approx 5-10% of babies require simple stimulation at birth to help them breathe (drying and rubbing) All babies require immediate assessment at birth and simple newborn care (assess breathing, dry, and put the baby skin-to-skin with mother) <1.4 million babies Fig. 123.1  Estimates of infants requiring resuscitation at birth. (From Wall SN, Lee ACC, Niermeyer S, et al. Neonatal resuscitation in low-­ resource settings: what, who, and how to overcome challenges to scale up? Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 2009;107:S47–S64. Fig. 1.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 123  u  Neonatal Resuscitation ­and Delivery Room Emergencies  1071 ventilation corrective steps can be remembered with the mnemonic MRSOPA: mask readjustment, reposition the head, suction mouth and nose, open the mouth, pressure increase, and alternative airway. Causes of poor response to ventilation are mask leak, airway obstruction, insufficient pressure, pleural effusions, pneumothorax, excessive air in the stomach leading to abdominal competition, hypo- volemia, diaphragmatic hernia, or prolonged intrauterine asphyxia. For infants who do not respond to noninvasive PPV after corrective steps have been taken, endotracheal intubation should be performed. For infants with an otherwise normal airway weighing <1,000 g, ETT size is usually 2.5 mm; for infants 1,000-­2,000 g, 3 mm; and for infants >2,000 g, 3.5 mm. A general rule for depth of insertion from upper lip in centimeters is 6 + infant’s weight in kilograms. The best method to confirm accurate ETT position is exhaled CO2 detection. A laryngeal mask airway is an alternative method to establish an airway, especially if face mask PPV is ineffective or providers skilled in intubation are unavailable. For most infants, the underlying cause for a persistently low heart rate (<60 beats/min) is not a primary cardiac cause, but instead the result of ineffective ventilation. Therefore if the heart rate remains <60 beats/min after 60 seconds of PPV with corrective MRSOPA steps, the infant should be intubated (if not already done) to achieve effective ventilation. Once the infant is intubated, if the heart rate remains <60 beats/min, chest compressions should be initiated with continued ventilation, and Fio2 should be increased to 100%. Chest compressions should be initiated over the lower third of the ster- num at a rate of 90 per minute. A provider, separate from the person providing ventilation, is needed to administer chest compressions. The thumb technique should be used for chest compressions; the tips of both thumbs are used to depress the sternum, with the fin- gers on each side encircling the chest; this is the preferred method to administer chest compressions, because it has been shown to achieve a higher blood pressure, increase coronary perfusion, and result in less fatigue. In infants, regardless of whether an alterna- tive airway has been secured, chest compressions are always coor- dinated with PPV. The ratio of compressions to ventilation is 3:1 (90 compressions:30 breaths). Chest compressions should continue uninterrupted for 60 seconds before reassessing heart rate to deter- mine next steps. Medications are rarely required, but epinephrine should be admin- istered when the heart rate is <60 beats/min after 60 seconds of com- bined ventilation and chest compressions or during asystole. An intravenous route is recommended for epinephrine administration. The umbilical vein can generally be readily cannulated and is the pre- ferred method for administration of medications and volume expand- ers during neonatal resuscitation (Fig. 123.3). An intraosseous route is another option if umbilical venous access is not obtained. Epinephrine (initial dose recommendation of 0.02 mg/kg intravenously/intraosse- ously followed by a 3-­mL flush) is given for asystole or for continued heart rate <60 beats/min after 60 seconds of combined resuscitation. The dose may be repeated every 3-­5 minutes. Epinephrine may also be given through the ETT (0.1 mg/kg). If adequate resuscitation con- tinues for 20 minutes without a detectable heart rate, it is reasonable to discuss redirection of care with the team and family and to stop resus- citative efforts. RESUSCITATION OF THE PRETERM INFANT Resuscitation of the preterm infant should follow the same steps as a term infant, with some special considerations. Whereas resuscitation of term infants should start with room air, resuscitation of preterm infants <35 weeks’ gestation should be initiated with Fio2 between 21% and 30%. Pulse oximetry of the preductal (right) hand should be used to titrate O2 concentrations for targeted saturations per the NRP algorithm (see Fig. 123.2). Most very low birthweight infants will need more than 30% once titration begins. Special attention should be paid to keeping the preterm infant warm in the delivery room. Quality improvement projects have initiated bun- dles to improve admission temperatures of preterm infants to the neo- natal intensive care unit (NICU) and have included such interventions as higher ambient temperatures in the delivery room, immediate place- ment of preterm infants into a plastic bag or under plastic wrap rather than drying, and exothermic mattress for resuscitation and transport of the preterm infant. SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES IN THE DELIVERY ROOM Meconium Meconium staining of the amniotic fluid may be an indication of fetal stress. All infants born through meconium-­stained amniotic fluid (regardless if the infant is vigorous or nonvigorous) should receive the same initial steps of neonatal resuscitation as infants without * © 2020 American Heart Association Fig. 123.2  Newborn resuscitation algorithm. CPAP, Continuous positive airway pressure; ECG, electrocardiogram; ETT, endotracheal tube; HR, heart rate; IV, intravenous; PPV, positive pressure ventilation; UVC, umbilical venous catheter. (From Aziz K, Lee HC, Escobedo MB, et al. Part 5: Neonatal Resuscitation: 2020 American Heart Association Guidelines for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and Emergency Cardio- vascular Care. Circulation 2020;142[16_suppl_2]:S524–S550. Fig. 1.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1072  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant meconium-­stained fluid and should be assessed as any other infant. Tracheal intubation for meconium aspiration may delay the initiation of effective PPV and ultimately delay effective gas exchange and is not indicated. Placental Abruption Placental abruption (abruptio placentae) or uterine rupture at birth can lead to acute fetal blood loss and a hypovolemic, anemic infant at delivery. Infants can present pale and apneic with poor tone, decreased perfusion, and bradycardia. In addition to perform- ing routine neonatal resuscitation, when an infant is suspected to be symptomatic from acute blood loss, an emergency low-­lying umbilical venous catheter (UVC) or interosseous needle should be placed and emergent type O Rh-­negative blood should be obtained. In acute blood loss, the blood should be administered as quickly as possible in 10 mL/kg aliquots in the delivery room. Adequate com- munication between obstetrics and pediatrics regarding suspected acute blood loss is crucial to early recognition and treatment of the infant. Neonatal Encephalopathy Infants with neonatal encephalopathy are born with abnormal neuro- logic function, including level of consciousness, muscle tone, apnea, and reflexes. Although there are many possible etiologies, when symptoms are accompanied by a defined perinatal event such as cord prolapse or placental abruption, hypoxic-­ischemic brain injury is the presumed cause. These infants are often born with impaired respira- tory drive. Immediately after initial resuscitation and stabilization, a thorough neurologic examination should be performed to assess if the infant meets formal criteria for moderate to severe encephalopathy and qualifies for therapeutic hypothermia (see Chapter 122.4). Airway Anomalies Hypoplasia of the mandible with posterior displacement of the tongue may result in upper airway obstruction (Pierre Robin, Stick- ler, DiGeorge, and other syndromes; see Chapters 118 and 357). Symptoms may sometimes be temporarily relieved by pulling the tongue or mandible forward or placing the infant in the prone position. Other rare anatomic causes of upper airway obstruction at birth include laryngeal atresia or stenosis, teratomas, hygromas, and oral tumors. Critical fetal and then neonatal airway obstruction represents an emergency in the delivery room. High-­risk perinatal care has led to the more frequent prenatal diagnosis of these disor- ders. When diagnosed prenatally, planning can identify the loca- tion of delivery and interventions available at delivery. The ex utero intrapartum treatment (EXIT) procedure allows time to secure the airway in an infant known prenatally to have critical airway obstruction, before the infant is separated from the placenta (Fig. 123.4; see Chapter 118). Uteroplacental gas exchange is maintained throughout the procedure. Pulmonary Disorders Both congenital and acquired abnormalities can contribute to respira- tory failure in the neonate. A scaphoid abdomen suggests a diaphrag- matic hernia, as does asymmetry in contour or movement of the chest. An infant with a known diaphragmatic hernia should be immediately intubated in the delivery room and an orogastric tube placed to avoid gaseous distention of the bowel from crying or PPV. The infant should then be transferred to a tertiary referral center for surgical evaluation and treatment (see Chapter 124.1). In infants with a prenatal diagnosis of hydrops, pleural effusions may be present at delivery, preventing adequate lung expansion and gas exchange. Similarly, infants requiring PPV in the delivery room are at risk for pneumothorax. Infants with pulmonary hypoplasia or meconium-­stained fluid are at increased risk of this complica- tion. Clinically, infants with a pleural effusion or pneumothorax present with respiratory distress and hypoxia, with diminished breath sounds on the affected side. Transillumination may be help- ful to confirm the diagnosis. Emergency evacuation of a pneumo- thorax or pleural effusion without radiographic confirmation is indicated in an infant who is unresponsive to resuscitation efforts and has asymmetric breath sounds, bradycardia, and cyanosis. An angiocatheter attached to a stopcock and syringe should be used for evacuation. For a pleural effusion, with the infant in the supine position, the angiocatheter should be inserted in the fourth or fifth intercostal space in the anterior axillary line and directed posteri- orly to evacuate the fluid. For a pneumothorax, an angiocatheter can be inserted in the fourth intercostal space in the anterior axil- lary line or the second intercostal space in the midclavicular line and air evacuated (see Chapter 124). Abdominal Wall and Neural Tube Defects Appropriate management of patients with abdominal wall defects (omphalocele, gastroschisis) in the delivery room prevents exces- sive fluid loss and minimizes the risk for injury to the exposed viscera. Gastroschisis is the more common defect, and typically the intestines are not covered by a membrane. The infant’s lower body, including exposed intestines, should be gently placed in a sterile clear plastic bag after delivery. A membrane often covers an omphalocele, and care should be taken to prevent its rupture. The omphalocele should either be wrapped in a sterile dressing or the infant’s lower body, including the omphalocele, which should be placed within a sterile bag. With both defects, a nasogastric tube should be placed, and the infant transferred to a tertiary referral center for surgical consultation and evaluation for associated anom- alies (see Chapter 144). Fig. 123.3  Emergently placed umbilical venous catheter suitable for neonatal resuscitation. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 123  u  Neonatal Resuscitation ­and Delivery Room Emergencies  1073 Similarly, infants born with neural tube defects such as a myelome- ningocele need special care at delivery to protect the exposed neural tube tissue from trauma and infection; infants should be placed on their side or abdomen for resuscitation. The site of the neural tube defect should be covered with a moist sterile dressing to prevent drying and infection. The infant should then be transferred to a tertiary refer- ral center for surgical evaluation and treatment. INJURY DURING DELIVERY Central Nervous System Both extracranial and intracranial birth injuries can be seen in infants after birth. Extracranial lesions include cephalohematoma, caput succedaneum, and subgaleal hemorrhage. Intracranial birth injuries include subdural hemorrhage, subarachnoid hemorrhage, and epidural hematoma. The most common intracranial injury experienced at birth is subdural hemorrhage, with increasing inci- dence seen with instrument-­assisted vaginal deliveries (see Chap- ters 122.1 and 122.2). Fractures The clavicle is the most frequently fractured bone during labor and delivery. It is particularly vulnerable to injury with difficult delivery of the shoulder in the setting of shoulder dystocia, as well as with extended arms in breech deliveries. In the treatment of shoulder dystocia, the obstetrician may intentionally fracture the clavicle so that delivery can proceed. Symptoms of a clavicular fracture include an infant not moving the arm freely on the affected side, palpa- ble crepitus or bony irregularity, and asymmetric or absent Moro reflex on the affected side. The prognosis for this fracture is excel- lent. Often, no specific treatment is needed, although in some cases the arm and shoulder on the affected side are immobilized for comfort. Fractures of the long bones are fairly rare. Injuries often present with absent spontaneous movement of the extremity. Associated nerve involvement may also occur. Treatment involves immobilization of the affected extremity with a splint and orthopedic follow-­up. Brachial Plexus Injuries Brachial plexus injuries result from stretching and tearing of the brachial plexus (spinal roots C5-­T1) at delivery. Although shoulder dystocia is associated with an increased risk of brachial plexus injury, it can also occur during a routine delivery (see Chapter 122.6). ONGOING CARE AFTER RESUSCITATION The “golden hour” after a baby’s birth should emphasize effective neo- natal resuscitation, postresuscitation care, prevention of hypothermia (including maternal skin-­to-­skin contact), immediate breastfeeding if able, prevention of hypoglycemia, and therapeutic hypothermia for cases of moderate to severe neonatal encephalopathy (birth asphyxia). After supportive measures have stabilized the infant’s condition, a spe- cific diagnosis should be established and appropriate continuing treat- ment instituted. For infants who receive more intensive resuscitation, a plan for ongoing monitoring and treatment should be established. These infants may experience ongoing acidosis, electrolyte abnormalities, hypo-­ or hyperglycemia, impaired thermoregulation, and respira- tory insufficiency. If infection is suspected, appropriate antibiotics should be started as soon as possible. Severe neonatal encephalopa- thy may also depress myocardial function and cause cardiogenic shock despite the recovery of heart and respiratory rates. Fluids and dopamine or epinephrine as a continuous infusion should be started after initial resuscitation efforts, to improve cardiac output in an infant with poor peripheral perfusion, weak pulses, hypoten- sion, tachycardia, or poor urine output. Regardless of the severity of neonatal encephalopathy or the response to resuscitation, asphyxi- ated infants should be monitored closely for signs of multiorgan hypoxic-­ischemic tissue injury (see Chapter 122.4). Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Fig. 123.4  Ex utero intrapartum ther- apy (EXIT) procedure. Baby with tera- toma and critical high airway obstruc- tion syndrome (CHAOS). Trachea is displaced to the lateral neck. (Courtesy Dr. Mark Wulkan, Pediatric Surgery, Emory University.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1074  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant Successful establishment of adequate lung function at birth depends on airway patency, functional lung development, and maturity of respira- tory control. Fetal lung fluid must be removed and replaced with gas. Functional residual capacity (FRC) must be established and main- tained to develop a ventilation-­perfusion relationship that will provide optimal exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide between alveoli and blood. Pulmonary blood flow increases dramatically, and the newborn must establish and maintain breathing patterns that are distinct from fetal breathing movements. CLEARANCE OF FETAL LUNG FLUID In utero, lung fluid is actively secreted by epithelial cells into air spaces. This fluid is essential for normal lung development and severe pulmo- nary hypoplasia results in infants who are unable to maintain appropri- ate fetal lung fluid. During birth, fluid must be cleared from the airways to allow for gas exchange. During birth, the lung epithelial cells must transition from fluid secreting to fluid absorbing. Increased intrathoracic pressure from uterine squeeze and flexion of the infant during delivery likely contribute to movement of fluid out of the infant’s nose and mouth at delivery. Additionally, inspiration decreases intrapleural pressure forming a pressure gradient that leads to the movement of fluid toward the smaller airways and ultimately out of the air spaces. As fluid moves out of the airways there is an increased interstitial hydrostatic pressure that contributes to fluid reentering the airway during each expiration until it is eventually cleared from the interstitial tissues over the course of hours. ESTABLISHMENT OF A FUNCTIONAL RESIDUAL CAPACITY FRC represents a balance point between collapsing and distending forces on the lung at end-­expiration. Lung recoil comes from a combi- nation of the intrinsic elasticity of the lung tissue and the surface ten- sion within the lung. Surfactant plays an important role in reducing surface tension in the newborn. Premature infants and those infants with insufficient surfactant have an increased tendency toward lung collapse as observed in respiratory distress syndrome (see Chapter 126). Although the chest wall provides resistance to collapse in older children and adults, the highly compliant chest wall of the newborn and particularly the preterm newborn provides little resistance to lung recoil. Instead, resistance to lung collapse comes from a combination of lung tissue hydrostatic, osmotic, and oncotic pressures in addition to expiratory braking maneuvers. The neonate’s expiratory braking maneuvers include adduction of the glottis and engagement of the dia- phragm during expiration. Additional activities such as grunting and crying further support establishment of FRC. INCREASED PULMONARY BLOOD FLOW In utero, the placenta is the source of gas exchange, and blood is diverted away from the developing lungs by way of the foramen ovale and ductus arteriosus. Only 10% of the cardiac output passes through the fetal lung circulation. Following birth, blood flow to the pulmonary circulation increases due to decreasing pulmonary vascular resistance and closure of in utero shunts. The decline in pulmonary vascular resistance is driven by clearance of fetal lung fluid, oxygen-­stimulated smooth muscle relaxation, and release of nitric oxide. Pulmonary vas- cular resistance decreases 50% over the first 24 hours and continues to decline over the first weeks of life. The foramen ovale is function- ally closed after birth due to increased systemic vascular resistance and increased pressures in the left ventricle and left atrium. The duc- tus arteriosus is slower to close and ductal constriction is driven by a loss of prostaglandins from the placenta, increased oxygen exposure, and decreased local nitric oxide. Increasing pulmonary blood flow and decreasing mixing of oxygenated and deoxygenated blood after birth contributes to changing saturations in the newborn, which rise from 60% immediately after birth to over 90% by approximately 10 minutes of life (Fig. 124.1) BREATHING PATTERNS IN NEWBORNS Fetal breathing movements can be observed before birth. They are generally discontinuous and generate only small tidal volumes. Fol- lowing delivery, the infant must establish a regular breathing pattern with increased tidal volumes. Triggers driving this change include increased Paco2, activation of chemoreceptors, and a loss of placental prostaglandins, which suppress respiratory drive. Within the fetus, low oxygen tension has an inhibitory effect on breathing. Following birth, hypoxia will eventually become a driver of respiratory effort, but in the immediate postpartum period and in the premature infant, hypoxia may depress respiratory drive. DISORDERED TRANSITION TO PULMONARY RESPIRATION The successful transition from placental derived oxygen delivery to pulmonary respiration requires timely completion of fetal lung fluid clearance, creation of FRC, increased pulmonary blood flow, and estab- lishment of normal breathing patterns. Failures in any of these tasks are associated with respiratory disorders in the neonate. Failure in the timely clearance of fetal lung fluid is associated with transient tachy- pnea of the newborn (see Chapter 128). An inability to establish FRC is a feature of respiratory distress syndrome (see Chapter 126). A fail- ure in decreasing pulmonary vascular resistance causes persistent pul- monary hypertension of the newborn (see Chapter 130) and in infants without appropriate respiratory patterns, apnea (see Chapter 125) is a presenting concern. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Chapter 124 Transition to Newborn Pulmonary Respiration Alicia J. Sprecher, Krishna K. Acharya, and Susan S. Cohen 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 Minutes after birth 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 50 60 70 80 90 100 SpO2 (%) Preductal Postductal Fig. 124.1  Pre-­ and postductal Spo2 levels during the first 15 minutes after birth (median; IQR). Postductal Spo2 levels were significantly lower than preductal Spo2 levels at 3, 4, 5, 10, and 15 minutes. (Modified from Mariani G, Dik PB, Ezquer A, et al. Pre-­ductal and post-­ductal O2 satura- tion in healthy term neonates after birth. J Pediatr. 2007;150:418–421.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 125  u  Apnea  1075 Apnea is a prolonged cessation of respiration and must be distin- guished from periodic breathing because apnea is often associated with serious illness. Although there is no universal agreement, apnea is usually defined as cessation of breathing for a period of ≥20 sec- onds, or a period <20 seconds that is associated with a change in tone, pallor, cyanosis, or bradycardia (<80-­100 beats/min). Based on the absence of respiratory effort and/or airflow, apnea can be obstructive, central, or mixed. Obstructive apnea is characterized by absence of airflow but persistent chest wall motion. Pharyngeal collapse may follow the negative airway pressures generated during inspiration, or it may result from incoordination of the tongue and other upper airway muscles involved in maintaining airway patency. Central apnea is caused by decreased central nervous system (CNS) stimuli to respiratory muscles and results in both airflow and chest wall motion being absent. Gestational age (GA) is the most impor- tant determinant of respiratory control, with the frequency of central apnea being inversely related to GA. The immaturity of the brainstem respiratory centers is manifest by an attenuated response to CO2 and a paradoxical response to hypoxia that results in central apnea rather than hyperventilation. Mixed apnea is most often observed in apnea of prematurity with obstructive apnea preceding central apnea. Short episodes of apnea are usually central, whereas prolonged ones are often mixed. OBSTRUCTIVE APNEA Obstructive apnea derives from interrupted upper airway flow. Causes of obstructive apnea can largely be divided into anatomic abnormali- ties and neuromuscular abnormalities. Craniofacial disorders are a common cause of obstructive apnea of the newborn. Micrognathia, retrognathia, or Pierre Robin sequence all cause upper airway obstruction due to backward dislodgement of the tongue into the airway. This obstruction may be improved by prone positioning of the neonate. Although cleft lip and palate are not always associated with obstructive apnea, infants with these conditions are at risk for apnea related to abnormal narrowing of the upper airway structures. Additional anatomic abnormalities that can contribute to obstructive apnea include narrowing or occlusion of the nasal passages (i.e., choanal atresia) or narrowing of the airways (i.e., laryngomala- cia). Many causes of anatomic obstruction are syndromic and include skeletal dysplasia, VACTERL association, Joubert syndrome, CHARGE syndrome, DiGeorge syndrome, and Stickler syndrome. Neuromuscular weakness can contribute to obstructive apnea via airway collapse in the setting of low tone. Additionally, respiratory muscle weakness may impede the infant from overcoming normal air- way resistance. CENTRAL APNEA Central apnea has a wide range of etiologies and should always lead to a diagnostic evaluation as it can often be an early warning sign of clinical decompensation. Table 125.1 provides a framework for the disease processes that can contribute to apnea. Infection or metabolic derangements should always be considered as an etiology for infants with new or worsening apnea. Abnormal CNS control of breathing can be related to prematurity, but other CNS abnor- malities including injury or malformation can contribute to central apnea. Congenital central hypoventilation syndrome is a rare per- manent genetic cause of central apnea that begins in the neonatal period (see Chapter 468.2). APNEA OF PREMATURITY Apnea in preterm infants is defined as cessation of breathing for ≥20 seconds or for any duration if accompanied by cyanosis and brady- cardia (<80-­100 beats/min). The incidence of associated bradycardia increases with the length of the preceding apnea and correlates with the severity of hypoxia. Short apnea episodes (10 seconds) are rarely associated with bradycardia, whereas longer episodes (>20 seconds) have a higher incidence of bradycardia. Bradycardia follows the apnea by 1-­2 seconds in >95% of cases and is most often sinus. Vagal responses and rarely heart block are causes of bradycardia without apnea. Short, self-­resolving oxygen desaturation episodes noted with continuous monitoring are normal in neonates, and treatment is not necessary. Apnea of prematurity results from immature respiratory control, most frequently occurs in infants <34 weeks of GA, and occurs in the absence of identifiable predisposing diseases. The incidence of apnea of prematurity varies inversely with GA. Apnea of prematurity is almost universal in infants born at <28 weeks of GA, and the incidence rap- idly decreases from 85% of infants <30 weeks of GA to 20% of infants <34 weeks of GA. The onset of apnea of prematurity can be during the initial days to weeks of age but is often delayed if there is respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) or other causes of respiratory distress. In pre- mature infants without respiratory disease, apneic episodes can occur throughout the first 7 postnatal days with equal frequency. In infants with apnea of prematurity, the events decline significantly by 34 weeks corrected GA. Resolution may be delayed in infants with bronchopul- monary dysplasia (see Chapter 127) because of poorer reserves and an increased incidence of subglottic stenosis, laryngomalacia, or tracheo- malacia, which can contribute to obstructive apneas. Chapter 125 Apnea Alicia J. Sprecher, Krishna K. Acharya, and Susan S. Cohen Table 125.1     Potential Causes of Neonatal Apnea and Bradycardia Central nervous system Intraventricular hemorrhage, drugs, seizures, hypoxic injury, herniation, neuromuscular disorders, Leigh syndrome, brainstem infarction or anomalies (e.g., olivopontocerebellar atrophy), transient following general anesthesia, congenital central hypoventilation syndrome Respiratory Pneumonia, obstructive airway lesions, upper airway collapse, atelectasis, extreme prematurity, laryngeal reflex, phrenic nerve paralysis, pneumothorax, paradoxical response to hypoxia Infectious Sepsis, meningitis (bacterial, fungal, viral), respiratory syncytial virus, pertussis Gastrointestinal Oral feeding, bowel movement, necrotizing enterocolitis, intestinal perforation Metabolic ↓ Glucose, ↓ calcium, ↓/↑ sodium, ↑ ammonia, ↑ organic acids, ↑ ambient temperature, hypothermia Cardiovascular Hypotension, hypertension, heart failure, anemia, hypovolemia, vagal tone Other Immaturity of respiratory center (prematurity); sleep state; sudden unexpected postnatal collapse Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1076  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant Preterm infants born at <35 weeks of GA are at risk for apnea of prematurity and therefore should receive cardiorespiratory monitor- ing. Apnea that occurs in the absence of other clinical signs of illness in the first 2 weeks in a preterm infant is likely apnea of prematurity; therefore additional evaluation for other etiologies is often unwar- ranted. However, the onset of apnea in a previously well preterm neonate after the second week of life is a critical event that may be associated with serious underlying pathology. Prompt investigation for sepsis/meningi- tis, medication side effects, metabolic derangements, structural CNS anomalies, intracranial hemorrhage, or seizures is warranted. TREATMENT Observation is the most common treatment strategy for infants with obstructive apnea, and temporizing measures including prone posi- tioning can help to minimize symptoms until sufficient patient growth alleviates the obstruction. The use of supplemental oxygen, nasal con- tinuous positive airway pressure (nCPAP), or bilevel positive airway pressure may facilitate stenting of airways and limit obstructive events. Surgical interventions depend on the underlying cause and include supraglottoplasty, palatoplasty, tongue-­lip adhesion, tongue base reduction, nasal stent, mandibular distraction, and in severe cases, tra- cheostomy to bypass areas of obstruction. For apnea of prematurity, gentle tactile stimulation, or provision of flow and/or supplemental oxygen by nasal cannula, is often adequate therapy for mild and intermittent episodes. nCPAP (3-­5 cm H2O) and high-­flow nasal cannula (HFNC; 1-­4 L/min) are appropriate thera- pies for mixed or obstructive apnea. The efficacy of both nCPAP and HFNC is related to their ability to splint the upper airway to prevent airway obstruction. Additionally, the maintenance of a higher func- tional residual capacity can decrease the duration of central apnea. Both are used widely, but nCPAP may be preferred in extremely pre- term infants because of its proven efficacy and safety. Recurrent or persistent apnea of prematurity is effectively treated with methylxanthines. Methylxanthines increase central respiratory drive by lowering the threshold of response to hypercapnia as well as enhancing contractility of the diaphragm. Caffeine and theophyl- line are similarly effective methylxanthines, but caffeine is preferred because of its longer half-­life and lower potential for side effects (less tachycardia and feeding intolerance). In preterm infants, caffeine reduces the incidence and severity of apnea of prematurity, facilitates successful extubation from mechanical ventilation, reduces the rate of bronchopulmonary dysplasia (see Chapter 127), and improves neuro- developmental outcomes. Caffeine therapy can be safely administered orally (PO) or intravenously (IV). Generally, infants are given an initial loading dose of 20 mg/kg of caffeine citrate followed 24 hours later by once-­daily maintenance doses of 5-­10 mg/kg. Because the therapeu- tic window is wide and serious side effects associated with caffeine are rare, monitoring of serum drug concentrations is usually unnecessary. Monitoring is primarily through observation of vital signs (tachycar- dia) and clinical response. Higher doses of caffeine may be more effec- tive without serious adverse events, but additional studies are needed to ensure safety. Studies suggest that early initiation of caffeine, in the first 3 days of life, in extremely preterm infants improves outcomes. However, it is reasonable to delay caffeine therapy until apnea occurs in older infants. Caffeine therapy is usually continued until an infant is free of clinically significant apnea or bradycardia for 5-­7 days without positive pressure respiratory support, or at 34 weeks’ postmenstrual age (PMA). In an infant with significant anemia, transfusion of packed red blood cells (RBCs) increases blood O2-­carrying capacity, improves tissue oxy- genation, and may be associated with a short-­term reduction in apnea. However, a long-­term benefit with regard to apnea appears unlikely. Gastroesophageal reflux (GER) is common in neonates, but despite being associated with apnea anecdotally, data do not support a causal relationship between GER and apneic events. In preterm infants, medi- cations that inhibit gastric acid production have potentially harmful side effects (increased incidence of sepsis, necrotizing enterocolitis, death) and may increase the incidence of apnea and bradycardia. There- fore the routine use of medications that inhibit gastric acid synthesis or promote gastrointestinal motility to reduce the frequency of apnea in preterm infants should be discouraged. Antireflux treatment does correlate with decreased rates of obstructive apnea; however, this does not seem to be a causal relationship. Feeding strategies including more frequent or slower/longer feedings may be considered. Thickening feedings with xanthan gum is linked to late-­onset necrotizing entero- colitis and should not be attempted. Other thickeners (i.e., rice) are not nutritionally appropriate for the preterm infant. The use of elemental or extensively hydrolyzed formulas can decrease transit time and may decrease symptoms of GER and can be considered in age-­appropriate populations. PROGNOSIS In 92% of infants by 37 weeks’ PMA and in 98% of infants by 40 weeks’ PMA, apnea of prematurity resolves spontaneously. However, infants born well before 28 weeks’ GA may experience apnea and bradycardic events until 44 weeks’ PMA. Beyond 44 weeks’ PMA, extreme events (apnea >30 seconds and/or bradycardia <60 beats/min for >10 seconds) are very rare. The period that an infant should be observed to ensure resolution of apnea and bradycardia is not defined and among insti- tutions is highly variable. However, many experts would recommend that an infant demonstrate an event-­free period of 5-­7 days before discharge. Although the nature and severity of events should dictate the length of observation, sufficiently large retrospective cohort stud- ies suggest that a 1–3-­day (infants born at ≥30 weeks’ GA), 9–10-­day (27-­28 weeks’ GA), or 13–14-­day (<26 weeks’ GA) event-­free period predicts resolution of apnea in up to 95% of infants successfully. Brief, isolated bradycardic episodes associated with oral feeding are common in preterm infants and are generally not considered significant during the event-­free period. Despite its high frequency in preterm infants, the harm associated with apnea of prematurity is unknown. However, apnea of prematurity does not appear to alter an infant’s prognosis unless it is severe, recur- rent, and refractory to therapy. Prompt, effective therapy and careful monitoring are vital to avoid prolonged, severe hypoxia, which may increase the risk of death and neurodevelopmental impairment. Sudden Infant Death Syndrome and Home Monitoring Although preterm infants are at higher risk for sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS), apnea of prematurity does not further increase that risk. The epidemiologic evidence that placing babies supine during sleep reduces the rate of SIDS deaths by >50% suggests that position- ing, and not prematurity, primarily influences the incidence of SIDS. Supine positioning on a firm sleep surface separate from the parents’ bed, promotion of breastfeeding, and pacifier use during sleep reduce the incidence of SIDS. Avoidance of cigarette smoke exposure and no parental use of alcohol or illicit drugs during pregnancy and after birth are also important in the prevention of SIDS. In-­home monitoring is an area that has received significant inter- est in prevention of SIDS. In a large cohort study, episodes of apnea and bradycardia were not uncommon (severe events detected in 10% of infants monitored and 2.3% of healthy term infants). Preterm infants remained at risk for apnea until approximately 43 weeks’ PMA; how- ever, most SIDS deaths occurred after apnea has resolved occurring at an average of 45.8 weeks’ PMA for premature infants and 52.3 weeks’ PMA for term infants. There was no evidence that home monitoring impacted the incidence of SIDS. The role for home monitors is likely limited to premature infants with prolonged or extreme episodes of apnea (and should be discontinued after 44 weeks’ PMA in this popula- tion), infants with specific risk factors for obstructive apnea, or requir- ing supplemental oxygen or mechanical ventilation. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 126  u  Respiratory Distress Syndrome (Hyaline Membrane Disease)  1077 INCIDENCE Respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) occurs primarily in premature infants; its incidence is inversely related to gestational age (GA) and birthweight. It occurs in 60–80% of infants <28 weeks’ GA, in 15–30% of those between 32 and 36 weeks’ GA, and rarely in those >37 weeks’ GA. The risk for development of RDS increases with maternal diabetes, multiple births, cesarean delivery, precipitous delivery, asphyxia, cold stress, and a maternal history of previously affected infants. The risk of RDS is reduced in pregnancies with chronic or pregnancy-­associated hypertension, maternal opiate use, prolonged rupture of membranes, and antenatal corticosteroid prophylaxis. ETIOLOGY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY Surfactant deficiency (decreased production and secretion) is the primary cause of RDS. In the absence of pulmonary surfactant, sig- nificantly increased alveolar surface tension leads to atelectasis, and the ability to attain an adequate functional residual capacity (FRC) is impaired. Additionally, insufficient surfactant contributes to heteroge- nous lung expansion with atelectatic areas remaining unventilated and progressive overdistension of ventilated regions according to Laplace’s law (Fig. 126.1). Although surfactant is present in high concentrations in fetal lung by 20 weeks of gestation, it does not reach the surface of the lungs until later. It appears in amniotic fluid between 28 and 32 weeks. Mature levels of pulmonary surfactant are present usually after 35 weeks of gestation. The major constituents of surfactant are dipalmitoyl phos- phatidylcholine (lecithin), phosphatidylglycerol, apoproteins (sur- factant proteins SP-­A, SP-­B, SP-­C, and SP-­D), and cholesterol (Fig. 126.2). With advancing GA, increasing amounts of phospholipids are synthesized and stored in type II alveolar cells (Fig. 126.3). These surface-­active agents are released into the alveoli, where they reduce surface tension and help maintain alveolar stability at end-­expiration. Synthesis of surfactant depends in part on normal pH, temperature, and perfusion. Asphyxia, hypoxemia, and pulmonary ischemia, par- ticularly in association with hypovolemia, hypotension, and cold stress, may suppress surfactant synthesis. The epithelial lining of the lungs may also be injured by high O2 concentrations and mechanical ventila- tion, thereby further reducing secretion of surfactant. Atelectasis results in perfused but not ventilated alveoli, causing hypoxia. Decreased lung compliance, small tidal volumes, increased physiologic dead space, and insufficient alveolar ventilation eventually result in hypercapnia. The combination of hypercapnia, hypoxia, and acidosis produces pulmonary arterial vasoconstriction with increased right-­to-­left shunting through the foramen ovale and ductus arteriosus and within the lung itself. Progressive injury to epithelial and endothe- lial cells results from atelectasis (atelectrauma), volutrauma, ischemic injury, and oxygen toxicity. This injury leads to effusion of protein- aceous material and cellular debris into the alveolar spaces (forming the classic hyaline membranes) further impairing oxygenation. RDS represents a vicious cycle of diminished surfactant production, wors- ening atelectasis, lung injury, and severe hypoxia (Fig. 126.4). CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS Signs of RDS usually appear within minutes of birth, although they may not be recognized for several hours in larger premature infants, until rapid, shallow respirations and cyanosis become more obvious. A later onset of tachypnea should suggest other conditions. Some patients require resuscitation at birth because of intrapartum asphyxia or initial severe respiratory distress (especially with birthweight <1,000 g). Characteristically, tachypnea, prominent (often audible) expiratory grunting, intercostal and subcostal retractions, nasal flaring, and cya- nosis are noted. Breath sounds may be normal or diminished with a harsh tubular quality, and on deep inspiration, fine crackles may be heard. The natural course of untreated RDS is characterized by progres- sive worsening of cyanosis and dyspnea. If the condition is inadequately treated, blood pressure may fall; cyanosis and pallor increase, and grunting decreases or disappears, as the condition worsens. Apnea and irregular respirations are ominous signs requiring immediate interven- tion. Untreated patients develop a mixed respiratory-­metabolic acido- sis with hypoxia and the potential to progress to respiratory failure with multisystem organ dysfunction due to inadequate oxygen delivery. In most cases, the signs reach a peak within 3 days, after which improve- ment is gradual. Improvement is often heralded by spontaneous diure- sis and improved blood gas values at lower inspired O2 levels and/or lower ventilator support. Death can result from severe impairment of gas exchange, pulmonary air leaks (pulmonary interstitial emphysema, pneumothorax; see Chapter 132), pulmonary hemorrhage (see Chap- ter 133), or intraventricular hemorrhage (IVH). DIAGNOSIS The clinical course, chest x-­ray findings, and blood gas values help establish the clinical diagnosis. On chest radiograph, the lungs may have a characteristic but not pathognomonic appearance that includes low lung volumes, a diffuse, fine reticular granularity of the parenchyma (ground-­glass appearance), and air bronchograms (Fig. 126.5). The ini- tial x-­ray appearance is occasionally normal, with the typical pattern developing during the first day. Considerable variation in radiographic findings may be seen, especially in infants who have already received treatment with surfactant replacement and/or positive pressure respi- ratory support; this variation often results in poor correlation between radiographic findings and the clinical course. Blood gas findings are characterized initially by hypoxemia and later by progressive hypox- emia, hypercapnia, and variable metabolic acidosis. In the differential diagnosis, early-­onset sepsis may be indistinguish- able from RDS. In neonates with pneumonia, the chest radiograph may be identical to that for RDS. Clinical factors such as maternal group B streptococcal colonization with inadequate intrapartum antibiotic pro- phylaxis, maternal fever (>38.5°C) or chorioamnionitis, or prolonged Chapter 126 Respiratory Distress ­Syndrome (Hyaline ­Membrane Disease) Alicia J. Sprecher, Krishna K. Acharya, and Susan S. Cohen P = 2T/r P = Inward pressure T = Surface tension r = Radius Surface tension = T Radius = 2 P = T Surface tension = T Radius = 1 P = 2T Surface tension = T Radius = 2 P = T Surface tension = 1/2T Radius = 1 P = T A B Fig. 126.1  Laplace’s law as it applies to alveolar distension. Laplace’s law states that the collapsing pressure in the alveolus is directly related to surface tension and inversely related to alveolar radius. In A the col- lapsing pressure is higher in the smaller alveoli thus the smaller alveolus further collapses, and larger alveolus distends leading to asymmetry in ventilation. In B with surfactant present, the particles become more densely spaced as the alveolus collapses, which decreases surface ten- sion, and the resulting collapsing pressure is equalized between the two alveoli. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1078  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant rupture of membranes (>18 hours) are associated with an increased risk of early-­onset sepsis. Although complete blood counts are neither sensitive nor specific in the diagnosis of early-­onset sepsis, the presence of marked neutropenia has been associated with increased risk. Tran- sient tachypnea of the newborn (TTN; see Chapter 128) is a common consideration that may be distinguished from RDS by its shorter and milder clinical course and is characterized by low or no need for O2 supplementation. Cyanotic congenital heart disease (in particular, total anomalous pulmonary venous return) can also mimic RDS both clini- cally and radiographically. Echocardiography with color-­flow imag- ing can be performed in infants who show no response to surfactant replacement, to rule out cyanotic congenital heart disease as well as ascertain patency of the ductus arteriosus and assess pulmonary vas- cular resistance (PVR). Persistent pulmonary hypertension, aspiration (meconium, amniotic fluid) syndromes, spontaneous pneumothorax, pleural effusions, and congenital anomalies (pulmonary congenital air- way malformations, pulmonary lymphangiectasia, diaphragmatic her- nia, lobar emphysema) must be considered in patients with an atypical clinical course but can generally be differentiated from RDS through radiographic and other evaluations (Fig. 126.6). Saturated phosphatidylcholine 50% Unsaturated phosphatidylcholine 20% Neutral lipids 8% 8% 8% 6% Phosphatidylglycerol Other phospholipids SP-A SP-B SP-C SP-D Fig. 126.2  Composition of surfactant. SP-­A, Surfactant-­associated protein A; SP-­B, surfactant-­associated protein B; SP-­C, surfactant-­ associated protein C; SP-­D, surfactant-­associated protein D. (From Jobe AH, Ikegami M. Biology of surfactant. Clin Perinatol. 2001;28:655–669.) Surface film Phosphate SCL34a2 Gpr116 ABCA3 SP-B SP-C SP-A SP-D SLC34a2 PC, PG Cholesterol SP-B, SP-C, SP-A SP-B SP-C ABCA3 Immature lamellar body Lysosome Nucleus ER ABCA3 SFTPB SFTPC SFTPD SLC34a2 SREB CEBPa NKX2-1 FOXA2 Golgi Degradation Recycling Secretion Protein Phospholipid Aqueous hypophase MACROPHAGES TYPE II CELL CSF2R GM-CSF Air Fig. 126.3  Biosynthesis of surfactant involves distinct pathways for surfactant proteins and lipids. SP-­B and SP-­C are trafficked from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to lamellar bodies via the Golgi complex and multivesicular body (MVB); in contrast, surfactant phospholipids are likely directly transported from the ER to specific lipid importers (ABCA3) in the lamellar body–limiting membrane. Surfactant proteins and lipids are assembled into bilayer mem- branes that are secreted into the alveolar airspace, where they form a surface film at the air–liquid interface. Cyclical expansion and compression of the bioactive film results in the incorporation and loss of lipids and proteins from the multilayered surface film. Surfactant components removed from the film are degraded in alveolar macrophages or are taken up by type II epithelial cells for recycling or degradation in the lysosome. The MVB plays a key part in the integration of pathways for surfactant synthesis, recycling, and degradation. NKX2-­1, FOXA2, SREBP, and CEBPα are transcription factors regulating surfactant protein and lipid synthesis. SLC34a2 is a phosphate transporter. Gpr116 is a membrane receptor regulating surfactant secretion. ABCA3, ATP-­ binding cassette transporter A3; GM-­CSF, granulocyte-­macrophage colony-­stimulating factor; PC, phosphatidylcholine; PG, phosphatidylglycerol; SP, sur- factant proteins. (From Polin RA, Abman SH, Rowitch DH, Benits WE, eds. Fetal and Neonatal Physiology, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Fig. 75.3.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 126  u  Respiratory Distress Syndrome (Hyaline Membrane Disease)  1079 Although rare, genetic disorders may contribute to respiratory dis- tress. Abnormalities in surfactant protein B and C genes as well as a gene responsible for transporting surfactant across membranes, ABC transporter 3 (ABCA3), are associated with severe and often lethal familial respiratory disease. Congenital alveolar proteinosis (con- genital surfactant protein B deficiency) is a rare familial disease that manifests as severe and lethal RDS in predominantly term and near-­ term infants (see Chapter 434). In atypical cases of RDS, a lung profile (lecithin:sphingomyelin ratio and phosphatidylglycerol determina- tion) performed on a tracheal aspirate can be helpful in establishing a diagnosis of surfactant deficiency. Other familial causes of neonatal respiratory distress (not RDS) include mucopolysaccharidosis, acinar dysplasia, pulmonary lymphangiectasia, and alveolocapillary dysplasia. Evaluation for these disorders should be pursued with the assistance of pediatric pulmonologists and geneticists. Evaluation may include lung imaging, fluid sampling, tissue biopsy, and genetic testing. PREVENTION Avoidance of unnecessary or poorly timed early (<39 weeks’ GA) cesarean delivery or induction of labor and appropriate management of high-­risk pregnancy and labor (including administration of ante- natal corticosteroids) are important preventive strategies. Strategies to prevent preterm birth include antenatal use of progesterone; measure- ment of cervical length and cerclage placement as indicated; and use of antibiotics, tocolytics, and magnesium for threatened preterm labor. In cases where premature delivery cannot be avoided, the transfer of the mother to an institution with appropriate neonatal care capabilities can improve early management of RDS. Antenatal and intrapartum fetal Fig. 126.6  Neonate with acute res- piratory distress. BP, Blood pressure; CVS, chorionic villus sampling; HCT, hematopoietic cell transplant. (From Battista MA, Carlo WA. Differential di- agnosis of acute respiratory distress in the neonate. In Frantz ID, ed. Tufts University of School of Medicine and Floating Hospital for Children Reports on Neonatal Respiratory Diseases. Vol. 2. Issue 3. Newtown, PA: Associates in Medical Marketing Co.; 1992.) Neonate with acute respiratory distress Abnormalities in Uncommon Diaphragmatic hernia Tracheoesophageal fistula Cysts and tumors Congenital lobar emphysema Pulmonary hypoplasia Accessory or sequestered lobes Pulmonary lymphangiectasia Pulmonary arteriovenous fistula Pulmonary alveolar capillary dysplasia Primary ciliary dyskinesia Anemia Polycythemia Hypotension Hypovolemia Upper airway obstructing lesions Laryngeal Lower airway Persistent fetal circulation Cyanotic congenital heart disease Congestive heart failure Ascites Necrotizing enterocolitis Abdominal mass Omphalocele Gastroschisis Sepsis Congenital lactic acidosis Hypothermia, cold stress Hyperthermia Hypoglycemia Methemoglobinemia Asphyxia Intracranial hemorrhage Neuromuscular disorders Drugs Chest wall disorders Diaphragmatic disorders Common Respiratory distress syndrome Transient tachypnea Pneumonia Aspiration syndromes Pneumothorax and air leaks Pulmonary edema Pleural effusion Pulmonary hemorrhage Perfusion BP HCT Airway findings Abdominal findings CVS findings or echo Other or mixed findings Neuro- muscular findings Diaphragm or chest wall Yes No Abnormal lungs by chest radiograph Diminished surfactant Impaired cellular metabolism Alveolar hypoperfusion Pulmonary vasoconstriction Hypotension “shock” Hypoventilation (disturbed V/Q) Progressive atelectasis Neonatal asphyxia Hypothermia Apnea pCO2’ Prematurity C-section Intrapartum asphyxia Familial predisposition Acidosis Hypovolemia pO2’    pH Fig. 126.4  Contributing factors in the pathogenesis of hyaline mem- brane disease. The potential “vicious circle” perpetuates hypoxia and pulmonary insufficiency. V/Q, Ventilation-­perfusion ratio. (From Farrell P, Zachman R. Pulmonary surfactant and the respiratory distress syn- drome. In Quilligan EJ, Kretchmer N, eds. Fetal and Maternal Medicine. New York: Wiley; 1980.) Fig. 126.5  Respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) of the newborn (hya- line membrane disease [HMD]). There is a diffuse ground-­glass or finely granular appearance (circle) in a bilateral and symmetric distribution. Hypoaeration is seen in nonventilated lungs (double arrow). (From Her- ring W. Learning Radiology: recognizing the Basics, 4th ed. Philadel- phia: Elsevier; 2020: Fig. 28.2.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1080  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant monitoring may decrease the risk of fetal asphyxia; asphyxia is associ- ated with an increased incidence and severity of RDS. Administration of antenatal corticosteroids to women before 37 weeks of gestation significantly reduces the incidence and mortality of RDS as well as overall neonatal mortality. Antenatal corticosteroids also reduce (1) overall mortality, (2) admission to the neonatal inten- sive care unit (NICU) and need for/duration of ventilatory support, and (3) incidence of severe IVH, necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC), and neurodevelopmental impairment. Betamethasone and dexamethasone have both been used antenatally. The American College of Obstetri- cians and Gynecologists (ACOG) recommends antenatal corticoste- roids for all women presenting between 24-­ and 34-­weeks’ gestation in preterm labor. Antenatal corticosteroid use before 24 weeks’ gesta- tion for preterm labor or rupture of membranes should be driven by the family’s preferences for intervention. ACOG recommends a single course of antenatal corticosteroid for mothers presenting between 34-­ and 36-­weeks’ gestation in preterm labor if no previous steroids have been given during the pregnancy. One repeat course of antenatal cor- ticosteroids may be considered for mothers at risk of preterm delivery more than 14 days from the prior course of steroids and with a GA less than 34 weeks. Additional repeat courses of antenatal corticosteroids are not recommended due to impact on birthweight, cerebral myelina- tion, and lung growth. Antenatal corticosteroids do not increase the risk of maternal death, chorioamnionitis, or puerperal sepsis. TREATMENT The basic defect requiring treatment in RDS is inadequate pulmonary O2-­CO2 exchange. Basic supportive care (thermoregulatory, circula- tory, fluid, electrolyte, and respiratory) is essential while FRC is estab- lished and maintained. Because most cases of RDS are self-­limited, the goal of treatment is to minimize abnormal physiologic variations and superimposed iatrogenic problems. Treatment of infants with RDS is best carried out in the NICU. Continuous monitoring of vital signs, review of chest radiography, and monitoring of blood gas values guides therapy in RDS. Oxygen- ation (So2) should be assessed by continuous pulse oximetry. Capillary blood samples are of limited value for determining Po2 but may be use- ful for Pco2 and pH monitoring. Arterial blood gas samples provide the most accurate assessment of oxygenation. Monitoring of blood gas parameters and mean arterial blood pressure through an umbilical or peripheral arterial catheter is useful in managing the shocklike state that may occur during the initial hours in premature infants who have been asphyxiated or have severe RDS. Because of the difficulty in dis- tinguishing group B streptococcal or other bacterial infections from RDS, empirical antibiotic therapy should be indicated until the results of blood cultures are available. Penicillin or ampicillin with an ami- noglycoside is suggested, although the choice of antibiotics should be based on the recent pattern of bacterial sensitivity in the hospital where the infant is being treated (see Chapter 129). Nasal Continuous Positive Airway Pressure Warm, humidified oxygen should be provided at a concentration sufficient to keep Pao2 between 50 and 70 mm Hg (91–95% Sao2) to maintain normal tissue oxygenation while minimizing the risk of O2 toxicity. If there is significant respiratory distress (severe retractions and expiratory grunting) or if Sao2 cannot be kept >90% at an Fio2 of ≥40, applying nasal continuous positive airway pressure (nCPAP) at 5-­8 cm H2O is indicated and usually produces a rapid improvement in oxygenation. Nasal CPAP reduces collapse of surfactant-­deficient alveoli and improves both FRC and ventilation-­perfusion matching. Early use of nCPAP for stabilization of at-­risk preterm infants begin- ning early (in the delivery room) reduces the need for mechanical ven- tilation. Alternatives to nCPAP include noninvasive positive pressure ventilation (NIPPV) and high-­flow nasal cannula (HFNC). NIPPV is generally unsynchronized, but intermittent higher pressures do appear to improve oxygenation and ventilation over several hours. Addition- ally, NIPPV may limit apnea as a cause of respiratory failure. HFNC used heated and humidified oxygen flow generally upward of 2 L/min to provide distending pressures to the airways. The distending pressure is variable, which may contribute to HFNC failure. The amount of nCPAP required usually decreases after approximately 72 hours of age, and most infants can be weaned from nCPAP shortly thereafter. Surfactant Replacement Therapy Surfactant deficiency is the primary pathophysiology of RDS. Immedi- ate effects of surfactant replacement therapy include improved alveolar-­ arterial oxygen gradients, reduced ventilatory support, increased pulmonary compliance, and improved chest radiograph appearance. In the past, intratracheal surfactant replacement for symptomatic prema- ture infants immediately after birth (prophylactic) or during the first few hours of life (early rescue) showed reduced air leak and mortal- ity from RDS. However, substantial evidence supports the feasibility and efficacy of nCPAP as the primary means of respiratory support for preterm infants with RDS with addition of surfactant based on clinical indication. Nasal CPAP started at birth is as effective as prophylactic or early surfactant and is associated with a reduction in bronchopulmo- nary dysplasia (BPD). Nasal CPAP is therefore the approach of choice for the delivery room management of a preterm neonate at risk for RDS. In neonates with RDS who fail nCPAP and require intubation and mechanical ventilation, treatment with endotracheal surfactant should be initiated immediately to avoid lung injury. Assisted venti- lation and surfactant are indicated for infants with RDS who cannot keep oxygen saturation >90% while breathing 40% oxygen and receiv- ing nCPAP. Delays in delivering surfactant once clinical criteria are met is associated with poorer outcomes including increased mortal- ity, increased incidence of pulmonary air leak, and increased risk for BPD. Repeated dosing is given every 6-­12 hours for a total of two to four doses, depending on the preparation. Exogenous surfactant should be given by a physician who is qualified in neonatal resusci- tation and respiratory management. Additional required on-­site staff support includes nurses and respiratory therapists experienced in the ventilatory management of preterm infants. Bolus delivery of surfac- tant is generally associated with better distribution throughout the lungs and faster improvement. Lung recruitment strategies include modest increase in tidal volume or positive end-­expiratory pressure (PEEP) before surfactant administration, which may improve dis- tribution. Appropriate monitoring equipment (radiology, blood gas laboratory, pulse oximetry) must also be available. Complications of surfactant replacement therapy include transient hypoxia, hyper- capnia, bradycardia and hypotension, blockage of endotracheal tube (ETT), and pulmonary hemorrhage. A number of surfactant preparations are available, including syn- thetic surfactants and natural surfactants derived from animal sources. There do not appear to be significant, consistent benefits to one prepa- ration over another. Infants requiring ventilator support after 1 week of age may experience transient episodes of surfactant dysfunction tem- porally associated with episodes of infection and respiratory deteriora- tion. Surfactant treatment may be beneficial in these infants. Recognizing the benefits of surfactant replacement therapy, in addi- tion to the potential protective effects of prophylactic nCPAP, some experts recommend intubation for prophylactic or early rescue sur- factant replacement therapy, followed by extubation back to nCPAP immediately once the infant is stable (usually within minutes). This method is commonly referred to as intubate, surfactant, and extubate (INSURE). A variation of the INSURE method has evolved known as MIST (minimally invasive surfactant therapy) or LISA (less invasive surfactant administration), in which a small feeding tube, rather than an ETT, is used to deliver intratracheal surfactant to a spontaneously breathing infant on nCPAP. LISA and/or MIST are increasingly being utilized as the preferred method for delivering surfactant in infants who are not anticipated to require prolonged invasive ventilation. The combination of LISA, antenatal corticosteroids, nCPAP, and limitation of positive pressure ventilation in the delivery room was associated with decreased rates of BPD when compared to INSURE. Other meth- ods of surfactant delivery are under investigation including the use of laryngeal mask airway and the use of nebulized surfactant to avoid air- way manipulation altogether. In two studies of aerosolized surfactant, the need for intubation was reduced by ∼50%. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 126  u  Respiratory Distress Syndrome (Hyaline Membrane Disease)  1081 Mechanical Ventilation Infants with respiratory failure or persistent apnea require assisted mechanical ventilation. Strict definitions for respiratory failure in extremely preterm infants with RDS are not agreed on universally, but reasonable measures of respiratory failure are (1) arterial blood pH <7.20, (2) Paco2 ≥60 mm Hg, (3) Sao2 <90% at O2 concentra- tion of 40% and nCPAP of 5-­8 cm H2O, and (4) persistent or severe apnea. The goal of mechanical ventilation is to improve oxygenation and ventilation without causing pulmonary injury or oxygen toxicity. Acceptable ranges of arterial blood gas (ABG) values vary significantly among institutions but generally range from Pao2 50-­70 mm Hg (Spo2 >90%), Paco2 45-­65 mm Hg (and higher after the first few days when risk of IVH is less), and pH 7.20-­7.35. During mechanical ventilation, oxygenation is improved by increasing either Fio2 or the mean air- way pressure. The mean airway pressure can be increased by raising the peak inspiratory pressure (PIP), inspiratory time, ventilator rate, or PEEP. Adjustment in PEEP is usually most effective; however, excessive PEEP may impede venous return, thereby reducing cardiac output and O2 delivery (see Chapter 89.1). PEEP levels of 4-­6 cm H2O are usually safe and effective and assist in establishing FRC. CO2 elimination is determined by the minute ventilation, which is a product of the tidal volume (dependent on the inspiratory time and PIP) and ventilator rate. Ventilator settings typically include a tidal volume of 4-­6 mL/kg and a starting rate of approximately 40 breaths/min. With use of high ventilatory rates, relatively short inspiratory time and sufficient expi- ratory time should be allowed to avoid air trapping and inadvertent PEEP. Synchronized intermittent mechanical ventilation (SIMV) deliv- ered by time-­cycled pressure-­limited, continuous flow ventilators is a common method of conventional ventilation for newborns. With pressure-­limited SIMV, a set PIP is delivered in synchrony with the patient’s own breaths for a specified rate per minute. For breaths above the set rate, pressure support breaths (8-­10 cm H2O above PEEP) are provided to help overcome the resistance associated with spontaneous breathing through the ETT. In pressure-­limited ventilation, the deliv- ered tidal volume is directly proportional to the respiratory compli- ance. Rapid changes in compliance occur with surfactant replacement therapy, requiring careful attention to tidal volumes and appropriate adjustments in PIP. In volume-­targeted ventilation a specific tidal vol- ume is set, and the PIP required to deliver it varies inversely with the respiratory compliance. Studies indicate that lung damage is related to recurrent lung collapse and overdistension rather than high pres- sures, thus volume-­targeted ventilation may represent the most lung protective strategy of conventional ventilation. Evidence suggests that volume-­targeted ventilation results in fewer pulmonary air leaks and may improve survival without BPD. Neurally adjusted ventilatory assist (NAVA) is a ventilator strategy that integrates electrical signals from the diaphragm to synchronize ventilator breaths with the patient. Increased diaphragmatic electri- cal signal indicates the impending onset of a breath. The strength of electrical signal indicates the size of breath intended by the patient. Using this strategy, the timing and tidal volume can be customized to the patient on a breath-­by-­breath basis, and this is believed to decrease overall pressures required and limit lung damage. NAVA technol- ogy can also be used to synchronize noninvasive ventilation. To date there is insufficient evidence to compare the outcomes of infants with RDS initially managed on NAVA ventilation to those managed with pressure-­limited or volume-­limited SIMV. High-­frequency ventilation (HFV) achieves desired alveolar ven- tilation by using smaller tidal volumes and higher rates (300-­1,200 breaths/min or 5-­20 Hz). This ventilation strategy maintains sustained alveolar expansion and therefore limits injury associated with recur- rent atelectasis. HFV may improve elimination of CO2 and improve oxygenation in patients who show no response to conventional venti- lators, as well as those who have severe RDS, interstitial emphysema, recurrent pneumothoraces, or meconium aspiration pneumonia. High-­frequency oscillatory ventilation (HFOV) and high-­frequency jet ventilation (HFJV) are the most frequently used methods. There is not strong evidence to favor HFOV over HFJV or vice versa. Many investigators have examined the use of HFV as a primary mode of ven- tilation in infants with RDS. There is some evidence that HFV may result in decreased rates of BPD and pulmonary air leak when com- pared to pressure-­limited SIMV; however, superiority over volume-­ targeted SIMV has not been consistently demonstrated. Permissive Hypercapnia and Avoidance of Hyperoxia Permissive hypercapnia is a strategy for management of patients receiving ventilatory support in whom priority is given to limiting ventilator-­associated lung injury by tolerating relatively high levels of Paco2 (>60-­70 mm Hg). Permissive hypercapnia can be implemented during nCPAP and mechanical ventilation but has not been shown to significantly impact outcomes. Hypocarbia is associated with poorer outcomes; therefore careful monitoring of Pco2 should be undertaken and moderate hypercapnia (>40-­50 mmHg) can be tolerated. Hyper- oxia may also contribute to lung injury in preterm infants. However, a lower target range of oxygenation (85–89%) compared with a higher range (91–95%) increases mortality and does not alter rates of BPD, BPD/death, blindness, or neurodevelopmental impairment. There- fore the currently recommended range of oxygen saturation targets is 91–95%. Discontinuation of Mechanical Ventilation Strategies for weaning infants from ventilators vary widely and are influenced by lung mechanics as well as the availability of ventilatory modes. Extubation to nCPAP prevents postextubation atelectasis and reduces the need for reintubation. NIPPV may further decrease the need for reintubation in premature infants, particularly when com- bined with NAVA technology to allow synchronization. HFNC (1-­8 L/ min) oxygen is often used to support term and near-­term infants fol- lowing extubation and appears to be comparable to nCPAP in prevent- ing postextubation failure. It is not clear whether nCPAP, NIPPV, or HFNC is more efficacious for promoting normal lung development and preventing BPD, but there is more evidence associated with nCPAP in extremely preterm infants. Preloading with methylxanthines enhances the success of extubation. Other Pharmacologic Therapies There are no pharmacologic therapies superior or equal to the effi- cacy of maintaining FRC (through noninvasive respiratory support and mechanical ventilation when necessary) and providing surfactant replacement therapy in the treatment of RDS. Systemic corticosteroids (predominantly dexamethasone), although effective in improving respiratory mechanics and reducing the incidence of BPD and death, are associated with increased risk of cerebral palsy and neurodevelop- mental impairment when used indiscriminately (see Chapter 127). Inhaled nitric oxide (iNO) has been evaluated in preterm infants following the observation of its effectiveness in term and near-­term infants with hypoxemic respiratory failure. Although iNO improves oxygenation in term and near-­term infants with hypoxic respiratory failure or persistent pulmonary hypertension of the neonate, trials in preterm infants have not shown significant benefit. PROGNOSIS Early provision of intensive observation and care of high-­risk newborn infants can significantly reduce the morbidity and mortality associated with RDS and other acute neonatal illnesses. Antenatal corticosteroids, postnatal surfactant use, and improved modes of ventilation have resulted in low mortality from RDS (approximately 10%). Mortality increases with decreasing GA. Optimal results depend on the avail- ability of experienced and skilled personnel, care in specially designed and organized regional hospital units, proper equipment, and lack of complications such as severe asphyxia, intracranial hemorrhage, or irremediable congenital malformation. Premature infants with RDS may go on to develop chronic lung disease and ultimately BPD (see Chapter 127). Pulmonary air leaks (pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum, pul- monary interstitial emphysema) are observed in 3–9% of extremely preterm infants with RDS (see Chapter 132). PPV with excessive Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1082  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant inspiratory pressures (and therefore excessive tidal volumes), either during resuscitation at delivery or in the initial hours of mechani- cal ventilation, is a common risk factor, but air leaks can also occur in infants breathing spontaneously. Although the risk of air leak was increased in infants receiving a higher level of nCPAP (up to 8 cm H2O) in the CPAP or Intubation at Birth (COIN) trial, subsequent tri- als have not demonstrated a similar effect. Additional complications of RDS may result from intubation proce- dures during the treatment of this disorder. Airway injury may occur at the time of intubation and adequate training is essential. Compli- cations of intubation including ventilator-­associated pneumonias and transient obstruction of the artificial airway are possible. With pro- longed or recurrent intubation local pressure injury can lead to the development of subglottic stenosis. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 126.1  Patent Ductus Arteriosus Krishna K. Acharya, Alicia J. Sprecher, and Susan S. Cohen INCIDENCE AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY The ductus arteriosus is a fetal vascular shunt connecting the aorta to the pulmonary artery that allows oxygenated blood to bypass the unin- flated fetal lungs and enter the systemic circulation. Following term birth, the ductus arteriosus constricts and is usually closed in the first few days of life. Although ductal closure occurs by 72 hours after birth in almost all term infants, the ductus remains patent in 65% of preterm infants born at <30 weeks’ GA and in 85% of infants born at 24 weeks’ GA. Risk factors for delayed closure of the PDA include hypoxia, aci- dosis, increased pulmonary pressure secondary to pulmonary vaso- constriction, systemic hypotension, immaturity, and local release of prostaglandins (which dilate the ductus). Shunting through the pat- ent ductus arteriosus (PDA) may initially be bidirectional or right to left. As RDS resolves, PVR decreases, and predominantly left-­to-­right shunting may occur, leading to left ventricular (LV) volume overload and pulmonary edema. CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS Manifestations of PDA may include (1) a hyperdynamic precordium, bounding peripheral pulses, wide pulse pressure, and a machine-­like continuous or systolic murmur; (2) radiographic evidence of cardio- megaly and increased pulmonary vascular markings; (3) hepatomeg- aly; (4) increasing oxygen dependence; (5) carbon dioxide retention; and (6) less often renal failure. Infants with a hemodynamically sig- nificant PDA often require escalation of ventilator and oxygen sup- port. The diagnosis is confirmed by echocardiographic visualization of a PDA with Doppler flow imaging that demonstrates left-­to-­right shunting. A hemodynamically significant PDA by echocardiogram has a PDA ≥1.5 mm, unrestricted pulsatile transductal flow, left atrial to aortic root ratio ≥1.5, and absent (end) diastolic flow in the descending aorta (Table 126.1). TREATMENT Interventions to encourage ductal closure include fluid restriction, cyclooxygenase (COX) inhibitors (indomethacin or ibuprofen), acet- aminophen, and surgical ligation. Short-­term benefits of any therapy must be balanced against adverse effects, such as transient renal dys- function and fluid imbalances associated with indomethacin. By the time of discharge in the majority of extremely preterm infants (>90%), the PDA will close spontaneously. Spontaneous duc- tal closure may be facilitated by general supportive measures, includ- ing early (<7 days of age) avoidance of excessive fluid administration and judicious use of diuretics to manage pulmonary edema. How- ever, within the first week of life, in 30% of infants with birthweight <1,500 g and 70% of infants <1,000 g, the PDA persists. Although many preterm infants with persistent PDA will remain clinically sta- ble while awaiting spontaneous closure, approximately 60% of infants <1,000 g will develop significant clinical instability (hypotension, renal failure, worsening respiratory failure secondary to pulmonary edema). Pharmacologic and surgical ductal closure may be indicated in the premature infant with a moderate to large, hemodynamically significant PDA when there is a delay in clinical improvement or deterioration. Pharmacologic Closure Pharmacologic closure of the PDA has been described using COX inhibitors that inhibit prostaglandin production, with equivalent effi- cacy and safety profiles described for ibuprofen and indomethacin. The efficacy of pharmacologic therapy is inversely proportional to the ges- tational and postnatal age, and closure is more likely when medication is administered before 21 days of age. However, successful closure has been reported up to 8 weeks of age. Whether indomethacin or ibupro- fen is used, 20–40% of infants demonstrate treatment failure, and of those infants, 10–20% require eventual surgical ligation. Rates of recur- rence following successful pharmacologic closure in general are low (<15%). Neither therapy significantly impacts the rate of NEC, BPD, or mortality. General contraindications to both indomethacin and ibuprofen include thrombocytopenia (<50,000 platelets/mm3), active hemorrhage (including severe IVH), NEC or isolated intestinal per- foration, elevated plasma creatinine (>1.8 mg/dL), or oliguria (urine output <1 mL/kg/hr). Importantly, the concomitant use of hydrocorti- sone and indomethacin in extremely preterm infants must be avoided because the combination is associated with a dramatic increase in spontaneous intestinal perforation. Although indomethacin reduces Table 126.1     Summary of Essential Parameters Used for Echocardiographic Assessment and Hemodynamic Evaluation of PDA PDA EVALUATION CRITERIA ESSENTIAL ECHOCARDIOGRAPHIC PARAMETERS FOR ASSESSMENT OF PDA AND HEMODYNAMIC EVALUATION Ductal characteristics PDA size (small 2 mm) and flow direction (left to right, right to left, or bidirectional) and Doppler assessment with maximum velocity (Vmax) in systole and end-­diastole Assessment of pulmonary over circulation Dilated left side of the heart on visual inspection “eyeballing” and LA/Ao ratio (mild 1.6) OR LVEDD (correlate with z scores) OR LPA diastolic velocity, mean velocity >0.42 m/sec, end-­diastolic velocity >0.2 m/ sec OR reversal of mitral E/A ratio *Document presence or absence and magnitude of intraatrial shunt Assessment of systemic hypoperfusion Retrograde or absent blood flow during diastole in descending aorta OR celiac trunk or SMA OR anterior or middle cerebral artery A comprehensive echocardiographic assessment should be performed to rule out any underlying congenital heart defect or pulmonary hypertension and delineate orientation of arch (left or right sidedness) before any intervention to close the PDA. E/A ratio, ratio of the early (E) to late (A) ventricular filling velocities; LA/Ao, left atrial to aortic ratio; LPA, left pulmonary artery; LVEDD, left ventricular end-­diastolic diameter; PDA, patent ductus arteriosus; SMA, superior mesenteric artery. From Singh Y, Fraisse A, Erdeve O, Atasay B. Echocardiographic diagnosis and hemodynamic evaluation of patent ductus arteriosus in extremely low gestational age newborn (ELGAN) infants. Front Pediatr. 2020;8:Article 573627. Table 1. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 126  u  Respiratory Distress Syndrome (Hyaline Membrane Disease)  1083 mesenteric blood flow, mounting experience suggests that low-­volume trophic enteral feeding during administration is safe. Prophylactic indomethacin given over the first 72 hours of age to preterm infants with birthweight <1,000 g reduces the incidence of severe IVH (grade III/IV), pulmonary hemorrhage, symptomatic PDA, and need for surgical PDA ligation. Although often implicated in spontaneous intestinal perforation and NEC, randomized controlled trials (RCTs) have failed to demonstrate that indomethacin increases their risk significantly. Short-­term side effects include reductions in cerebral, mesenteric, and renal blood flow. Oliguria unresponsive to diuretic therapy is observed frequently. Dosing regimens for indo- methacin vary considerably, but it usually is administered as a slow IV infusion (0.1-­0.2 mg/kg/dose over 30 minutes) every 12-­24 hours for three doses. A repeat course can be attempted if the duct fails to close or reopens, but additional (>2) courses do not appear to be efficacious. Longer courses (5-­7 days) of indomethacin are not recommended because of to an increased risk of NEC in one trial. Ibuprofen is as effective as indomethacin in closing a PDA, but ibu- profen is associated with reduced rates of oliguria and a small but sig- nificant reduction in the length of mechanical ventilation. Although higher doses may improve closure rates in the most immature infants, the typical IV or enteral dosing regimen for ibuprofen is 10 mg/kg for one dose, followed by two doses of 5 mg/kg every 24 hours. A meta-­ analysis showed that a higher dose of oral ibuprofen using 20 mg/kg per dose for one dose, followed by 10 mg/kg per dose for two doses 24 hours apart is superior in closing the PDA compared to indomethacin or the traditional ibuprofen dosing. As with indomethacin, a repeat course may be considered, but additional courses of ibuprofen are not efficacious and not recommended. Risk of NEC is not increased with indomethacin, but in comparison, ibuprofen reduces the relative risk of NEC. Unlike indo- methacin, ibuprofen has not been shown to reduce the risk of severe IVH. Compared to the IV route, enteral ibuprofen may be more efficacious. Whether ibuprofen used in combination with hydrocortisone results in increased risk of spontaneous intestinal perforation is unknown. Oral acetaminophen has been shown to be an effective medication in closing the PDA, with fewer side effects than existing agents. It is given enterally at 15 mg/kg per dose q6h for 3 days. In practice, most clinicians will use a course of one of the previously mentioned medications as first-­ line therapy (typically ibuprofen) and follow with a second course of acet- aminophen in a few days if the PDA remains patent and symptomatic. Surgical Ligation The infant whose symptomatic PDA fails to close with pharmacologic interventions or who has contraindications to COX inhibitors is a candidate for surgical closure via an open thoracotomy. Although the long-­term benefits are unclear, surgical ligation in infants born at <28 weeks’ GA and <1,250 g is associated with improved survival. Surgi- cal mortality is very low even in extremely low birthweight (ELBW) infants. However, postligation cardiac syndrome, a significant drop in blood pressure 6-­12 hours after ductal ligation, is experienced by up to 50% of low birthweight (LBW) infants. The hypotension has been attributed to increased systemic vascular resistance along with decreased pulmonary venous return, resulting in impaired preload and LV function. Fluid resuscitation, inotropic support (with dobutamine or milrinone), and hydrocortisone are usually effective. Other compli- cations of surgery include hemorrhage, pneumothorax, chylothorax, Horner syndrome, and injury to the recurrent laryngeal nerve resulting in vocal cord dysfunction. Inadvertent ligation of the left pulmonary artery or the transverse aortic arch has rarely been reported. Increased rates of neurodevelopmental impairment have been reported follow- ing surgical ligation, although a causal relationship remains uncer- tain. Due to the complications associated with surgical ligation, many centers have moved away from this modality and use a less invasive, percutaneous approach to PDA closure. Percutaneous Closure of the Patent Ductus Arteriosus Percutaneous closure of the PDA is a safe and effective procedure for definitive PDA closure. In 2019, the U.S. Food and Drug Administra- tion approved the Amplatzer PiccoloOccluder (Abbott Diagnostics, North Chicago, IL) for percutaneous PDA closure in preterm infants weighing 700 g or more (Fig. 126.7). A trial in 100 infants weighing <2 kg showed that this technique of PDA closure is 99% effective with a 2% risk of adverse events. Although a comparative trial has not been done against the traditional surgical approach, most US centers use percuta- neous closure as the first-­line approach for PDA closure when conser- vative treatment fails. This procedure is done under cardiac anesthesia in the catheterization laboratory. The femoral vein is accessed using modified Seldinger technique, and then, under fluoroscopic guidance, a catheter is advanced through the femoral vein all through the right ventricular and across the PDA and the Piccolo device is placed. This technique permits injection of contrast before and after device place- ment to ensure appropriate device selection, measure size of the PDA, and ensure that there is no occlusion of the descending aorta or left pulmonary artery after device placement. If there is evidence of nar- rowing, the device can be recaptured and repositioned until a satis- factory result is obtained. Rarely, appropriate device placement is not achieved, and the patient may have to undergo surgical ligation. The short-­term complications are bleeding at the insertion site, emboliza- tion of the device into the descending aorta or left pulmonary artery, post-­PDA ligation syndrome, and residual shunting across PDA. The long-­term complications are unknown, but these patients likely need surveillance echocardiography until 2-­3 years of age. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. RA LA LV RV Fig. 126.7  Percutaneous device closure of a PDA using the Amplatzer Piccolo Occluder. LA, Left atrium; LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle. (From Backes CH, Giesinger RE, Rivera BK, et al. Percutaneous closure of the patent ductus arteriosus in very low weight infants: considerations following US Food and Drug Administration ap- proval of a novel device. J Pediatr. 2019;213:218–221.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1084  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant INCIDENCE Bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD; also known as chronic lung dis- ease of prematurity) is a clinical pulmonary syndrome that develops in the majority of extremely preterm infants and is defined by a pro- longed need for respiratory support and supplemental oxygen. Almost 60% of infants born at ≤28 weeks’ gestation will develop BPD, and the incidence of BPD increases inversely with gestational age. For infants born at 22-­24 weeks, essentially 100% will develop BPD, the majority of whom will have moderate to severe disease. As neonatal care has improved and use of antenatal corticosteroids has become the stan- dard of care, survival of infants born at the extreme of viability has improved, and BPD is encountered with increased prevalence. In the United States, an additional 10,000-­15,000 new cases occur annually. Despite decades of experience, the incidence of BPD remains largely unchanged. ETIOLOGY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY BPD develops following preterm birth and the necessary life-­supporting interventions (particularly mechanical ventilation and supplemen- tal oxygen) that cause neonatal lung injury. As very low birthweight (VLBW) infant’s survival has improved by advances in neonatal care, the clinical syndrome associated with BPD has evolved. The clinical, radiographic, and lung histology of classic BPD described in 1967 by Northway, before widespread use of antenatal corticosteroids and postnatal surfactant, was that of a disease of preterm infants who were more mature. Infants who developed BPD initially demonstrated clas- sic respiratory distress syndrome (RDS), but the injurious mechani- cal ventilation and excessive supplemental oxygen required to support them resulted in a progressive, severe fibroproliferative lung disease. Improvements in respiratory care, as well as the introduction of surfac- tant and antenatal steroids, have allowed for less aggressive respiratory support strategies, and the need for excessive ventilator support and high percentages of inspired supplemental oxygen has decreased. Despite a reduction in the fibroproliferative disease described previ- ously, infants born in the modern era of neonatal care continued to require supplemental oxygen for prolonged periods. The new BPD is a disease primarily of infants with birthweight <1,000 g who were born at <28 weeks’ gestation, some of whom have initially little or no lung disease at birth but over the first weeks of age experience progressive respiratory failure. Infants with the new BPD are born at a more imma- ture stage of distal lung development, and lung histology demonstrates variable saccular wall fibrosis, minimal airway disease, abnormal pul- monary microvasculature development, and alveolar simplification. Although the etiology remains incompletely understood, the histopa- thology of BPD indicates interference with normal alveolar septation and microvascular maturation. The pathogenesis of BPD is likely multifactorial, but pulmonary inflammation and lung injury in an immature lung are consistently observed. Alveolar collapse (atelectrauma) as a consequence of sur- factant deficiency, together with ventilator-­induced phasic overdisten- tion of the lung (volutrauma), promotes lung inflammation and injury. Supplemental oxygen produces free radicals that cannot be metabo- lized by the immature antioxidant systems of VLBW neonates and fur- ther contributes to the injury. Pulmonary inflammation evidenced by infiltration of neutrophils and macrophages in alveolar fluid, as well as a host of proinflammatory cytokines, contributes to the progression of lung injury. Pre-­ and postnatal infection, excessive pulmonary blood flow via the patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), excessive administration of intravenous fluid, and pre-­ and postnatal growth failure are also significantly associated with the development of BPD. In addition, pulmonary artery hypertension may complicate BPD. Although the mechanisms are unclear, all likely promote lung injury by necessitat- ing increased or prolonged respiratory support or interfering with lung repair. Regardless, the result is an interference with normal develop- ment of the alveolar-­capillary unit and interference with normal gas exchange. CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS Over the first several weeks of age, infants developing BPD demon- strate persistent, often progressive respiratory distress and the need for respiratory support and supplemental oxygen. In extremely low birthweight (ELBW) infants at risk for BPD, the need for supplemental oxygen over the first 2 weeks of age follows one of three distinct pat- terns. Infants that follow the natural course of RDS, and by 3-­4 days of age require minimal (Fio2 <0.25) supplemental oxygen, have a low (<20%) risk of developing BPD. Infants who initially have a low O2 requirement (Fio2 <0.25) during the first week, but then experience early pulmonary deterioration and increased O2 requirement (Fio2 >0.25) during the second week, have a modest risk (approximately 50%) of developing BPD. Infants that have an early, persistently high (Fio2 >0.25) need for supplemental oxygen have a significantly high (70%) risk of developing BPD. Respiratory distress, commonly characterized by tachypnea and retractions, persists or worsens and is associated with hypercapnia, hypoxia, and oxygen dependence. The chest radiograph evolves from that of RDS to relative hyperinflation and fine, diffuse interstitial opaci- ties. Wandering atelectasis is common. In the most severe cases, usu- ally associated with prolonged mechanical ventilation and chronically high supplemental oxygen needs, frank cystic changes and/or pneu- matoceles are observed (Fig. 127.1). Infants with severe BPD receiving invasive ventilation often demonstrate airway obstruction. Excessive airway mucus and edema, airway instability caused by acquired tra- cheobronchomalacia, and bronchospasm are proposed etiologies. Acute airway obstruction is manifest clinically by abrupt hypoxemia and bradycardia and is often referred to as BPD spells. Acute, inter- mittent right-­to-­left intracardiac or intrapulmonary shunting caused by abrupt elevations in pulmonary artery pressure (PAP) may also contribute and resemble BPD spells. Spells are notoriously difficult to control, but occasionally will respond to bronchodilators, increasing positive end-­expiratory pressure (PEEP), and sedation acutely. A common complication of BPD is pulmonary hypertension. Pro- spective surveillance indicates that in approximately 15% of all infants born at <1,000 g and <28 weeks’ gestational age, echocardiographic signs of pulmonary hypertension will develop. Prenatal growth restric- tion, prolonged duration of mechanical ventilation and supplemen- tal oxygen, and increasing severity of BPD are all associated with an increased risk. Pulmonary hypertension has been reported in as many as 40% of infants with the most severe BPD and can progress to right-­ sided heart failure. Pulmonary hypertension complicating BPD has been associated with increased mortality. DIAGNOSIS BPD is diagnosed when a preterm infant requires supplemental oxy- gen for the first 28 postnatal days; it is further classified at 36 weeks’ postmenstrual age (PMA) according to the degree of O2 supplemen- tation (Table 127.1). Neonates receiving positive pressure support or ≥30% supplemental O2 at 36 weeks’ PMA or at discharge (whichever occurs first) are diagnosed as having severe BPD; those requiring <30% supplemental O2 have moderate BPD; and those who previ- ously required O2 supplementation for at least 28 days but are cur- rently breathing room air have mild BPD. Infants who require oxygen for <28 days of life have “no BPD.” Infants receiving supplemental O2 should undergo a stepwise reduction in supplemental O2 to room air at 36 weeks while under continuous observation and with Spo2 monitoring to determine whether they can be weaned off oxygen Chapter 127 Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia Krishna K. Acharya, Alicia J. Sprecher, and Susan S. Cohen Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 127  u  Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia  1085 (physiologic definition of BPD). This test is highly reliable and cor- related with discharge home on oxygen, length of hospital stay, and hospital readmissions in the first year of life. The risk of neurodevel- opmental impairment and pulmonary morbidity and the severity of BPD are directly correlated. Despite its simplicity, the current severity-­based definition of BPD has limitations. Because of incomplete or inaccurate data related to hospital transfer or early discharge, in a significant number of infants the diagnosis of BPD is either not documented or misapplied. Addi- tionally, those infants requiring O2 support at relatively high flow (>2 L/min) or very low (<0.25 L/min) or those receiving other modes of noninvasive ventilation are not well characterized. Calculation of effective oxygen may be helpful but is cumbersome and not well vali- dated. Clinical trials have relied on the need for supplemental O2 at 36 weeks PMA to define BPD. Although this definition can diag- nose BPD in the highest percentage of infants, it cannot discriminate between infants with milder BPD from those with most severe forms of BPD. A National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) workshop on BPD developed a definition of BPD that would address some of the concerns mentioned earlier (Table 127.2). Spe- cifically, it incorporates the diverse forms of respiratory support used, distinguishes infants who are receiving invasive vs noninvasive positive pressure ventilation (PPV), and introduces the term “lethal BPD” or grade III(A) severe BPD to identify infants who die from this disease before 36 weeks’ PMA. PREVENTION In general, there remains a lack of effective interventions that pre- vent BPD. Avoidance of mechanical ventilation with the early use of nCPAP and early, selective surfactant replacement therapy with rapid extubation decrease the incidence of BPD modestly. The avoidance of mechanical ventilation achieved by the combination of early rescue surfactant by the INSURE, MIST, or LISA method with nasal continu- ous positive airway pressure (nCPAP) has been associated with a mod- est reduction in BPD (see Chapter 126). Gentle ventilation strategies, including volume-­targeted ventilation and high-­frequency oscillatory ventilation (HFOV), have also been associated with small, inconsistent reductions in BPD. Caffeine therapy for apnea of prematurity has also been associated with a decreased risk of BPD. Although the mecha- nisms are unknown, caffeine likely supports effective spontaneous res- piration and decreases the likelihood that an infant will need invasive mechanical ventilation. Table 127.1     Definition of Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia: Diagnostic Criteria* GESTATIONAL AGE <32 Wk ≥32 Wk Time point of assessment 36 wk PMA or discharge home, whichever comes first Treatment with >21% oxygen for at least 28 days plus: >28 days but <56 days postnatal age or discharge home, whichever comes first Treatment with >21% oxygen for at least 28 days plus: Mild BPD Breathing room air at 36 wk PMA or discharge home, whichever comes first Breathing room air by 56 days postnatal age or discharge home, whichever comes first Moderate BPD Need† for <30% oxygen at 36 wk PMA or discharge home, whichever comes first Need† for <30% oxygen at 56 days postnatal age or discharge home, whichever comes first Severe BPD Need† for ≥30% oxygen and/or positive pressure (PPV or nCPAP) at 36 wk PMA or discharge home, whichever comes first Need† for ≥30% oxygen and/or positive pressure (PPV or nCPAP) at 56 days postnatal age or discharge home, whichever comes first *BPD usually develops in neonates being treated with oxygen and PPV for respiratory failure, most frequently respiratory distress syndrome (RDS). Persistence of the clinical features of respiratory disease (tachypnea, retractions, crackles) is considered common to the broad description of BPD and has not been included in the diagnostic criteria describing the severity of BPD. Infants treated with >21% oxygen and/or PPV for nonrespiratory disease (e.g., central apnea or diaphragmatic paralysis) do not have BPD unless parenchymal lung disease also develops and they have clinical features of respiratory distress. A day of treatment with >21% oxygen means that the infant received >21% oxygen for >12 hr on that day. Treatment with >21% oxygen and/or PPV at 36 wk PMA or at 56 days postnatal age or discharge should not reflect an “acute” event; rather, it should reflect the infant’s usual daily therapy for several days preceding and after 36 wk PMA, 56 days postnatal age, or discharge. †A physiologic test confirming that the oxygen requirement at the assessment time point remains to be defined. This assessment may include a pulse oximetry saturation range. BPD, Bronchopulmonary dysplasia; nCPAP, nasal continuous positive airway pressure; PMA, postmenstrual age; PPV, positive pressure ventilation. From Jobe AH, Bancalari E. Bronchopulmonary dysplasia. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2001;163:1723–1729. A C D B Fig. 127.1  Pulmonary changes in infants treated with prolonged, intermittent positive pressure breathing with air containing 80–100% oxygen in the immediate postnatal period for the clinical syndrome of hyaline membrane disease. A, A 5-­day-­old infant with nearly complete opacification of the lungs. B, A 13-­day-­old infant with “bubbly lungs” simulating the radiographic appearance of the Wilson-­Mikity syndrome. C, A 7-­month-­old infant with irregular, dense strands in both lungs, hyperinflation, and cardiomegaly suggestive of chronic lung disease. D, Large right ventricle and a cobbly, irregular aerated lung of an infant who died at 11 months of age. This infant also had a patent ductus arteriosus. (From Northway WH Jr, Rosan RC, Porter DY. Pulmonary disease following respiratory therapy of hyaline-­membrane disease. N Engl J Med. 1967;276:357–368.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1086  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant Systemic corticosteroids (dexamethasone) given either early (<7 days of age to ventilated infants at risk of BPD) or late (>7 days of age to infants with progressing lung disease) prevent both mortality and BPD significantly, but because of the increased risk of cere- bral palsy (CP) and neurodevelopmental impairment, their routine use is not recommended. The risk of neurodevelopmental impair- ment related to systemic corticosteroid use may be offset by the risk associated with BPD. A systematic review suggested that systemic corticosteroid therapy, when directed to infants with a ≥65% risk of developing BPD, may actually reduce the risk of neurodevelopmen- tal impairment and CP. Although predictive models that use clinical characteristics have been described with promising accuracy, ran- domized trials using them to guide corticosteroid therapy have not been performed. Inhaled corticosteroids administered to VLBW infants requiring mechanical ventilation at 7-­14 days of age did not prevent BPD sig- nificantly. However, early, prolonged administration to mechanically ventilated extremely preterm infants until they no longer require oxy- gen or positive pressure support has been shown to reduce the risk of BPD, but with a concerning trend toward increased mortality. Experi- ence with local delivery of corticosteroids by spiking surfactant with budesonide is emerging, and early data suggest that endotracheal administration of corticosteroids may reduce pulmonary inflamma- tion and the risk of BPD and death. However, additional evidence is needed before widespread use is implemented. The routine use of anti- biotics, inhaled bronchodilators, or diuretics has not been shown to prevent BPD. TREATMENT Treatment of evolving and established BPD is supportive. The basic tenets of therapy should include appropriate support of ventilation and aggressive nutritional support to optimize linear growth and encourage normal lung repair and development. Available evidence suggests short-­term benefits (improved pulmonary mechanics, modest reductions in respiratory support parameters) without an indication of impact on clinically relevant outcomes (survival, need for long-­term respiratory support, recurrent hospitalization). Cur- rently, available evidence does not support the routine use of any pharmacologic agents in infants with evolving or established BPD. Treatment decisions must weigh the perceived benefit against the potential harm. Diuretics and Fluid Restriction Infants with BPD often have excessive pulmonary interstitial fluid that compromises lung function and increases work of breathing. Diuretic therapy (usually with furosemide or chlorothiazide) has been associated with short-­term, temporary improvements in pulmonary compliance and the ability to wean respiratory support. Furosemide (1 mg/kg/dose IV or 2 mg/kg/dose orally [PO] every 12-­24 hours) has been demon- strated to decrease pulmonary interstitial edema and pulmonary vas- cular resistance (PVR), improve pulmonary function, and facilitate weaning from mechanical ventilation and oxygen. Adverse effects of long-­term furosemide therapy are common and include hyponatre- mia, hypokalemia, alkalosis, azotemia, hypocalcemia, hypercalciuria, cholelithiasis, renal stones, nephrocalcinosis, and ototoxicity. Sodium and potassium chloride supplementation is often necessary. Thiazide diuretics (e.g., chlorothiazide, 5-­10 mg/kg/dose every 12 hours) have been used as an alternative to avoid hypercalciuria, limit nephrocalci- nosis, and preserve bone development. Although avoidance of exces- sive fluid administration in the first few weeks of age is associated with a reduced risk of BPD, there is no evidence that fluid restriction (130-­ 140 mL/kg/day) in established BPD has any impact. Whether using diuretics or fluid restriction, careful attention to maintaining appropri- ate electrolyte levels as well as providing adequate caloric intake (often >120-­130 kcal/kg/day) is paramount to avoid negatively impacting nutrition. Bronchodilators Inhaled bronchodilators improve lung mechanics by decreasing airway resistance. Albuterol is a specific β2-­agonist used to treat bronchospasm in infants with BPD. Albuterol may improve lung compliance by decreasing airway resistance secondary to smooth muscle cell relaxation but can exacerbate bronchomalacia. Changes in pulmonary mechanics may last 4-­6 hours. Hypertension and tachycardia are adverse effects. Ipratropium bromide is a musca- rinic antagonist related to atropine, but the bronchodilator effect is more potent. Use of ipratropium bromide in BPD has been associ- ated with improved pulmonary mechanics. Compared with either agent used alone, combined use of albuterol and ipratropium bro- mide may be more effective. Few adverse effects have been noted. With current aerosol administration strategies, exactly how much medication is delivered to the airways and lungs of infants with BPD, especially if they are ventilator dependent, is unclear. Corticosteroids Systemic corticosteroids have been used to treat evolving and estab- lished BPD. In mechanically ventilated infants, systemic corticoste- roids improve pulmonary mechanics, allow weaning of ventilator support and supplemental O2, and facilitate extubation. When given at >7 days of age, long-­term benefits include a reduced need for O2 at 36 weeks PMA, improved survival, and decreased need for home O2. Short-­term adverse effects include hyperglycemia, hyper- tension, and transient hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy. Long-­term adverse effects include osteopenia, severe retinopathy of Table 127.2     New Definition of Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia Based on the 2016 NICHD Executive Workshop on Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia For infants born <32 wk gestation, with radiographic evidence of parenchymal lung disease, who at 36 wk require one of the following Fio2/oxygen levels/oxygen concentrations for ≥3 consecutive days to maintain Spo2 in the 90–95% range INVASIVE IPPV nCPAP, NIPPV, OR NASAL CANNULA ≥3 L/MIN NASAL CANNULA 1-­3 L/MIN NASAL CANNULA <1 L/MIN Grade I BPD No 21% Fio2 22–29% Fio2 22–70% Fio2 Grade II BPD 21% Fio2 22–29% Fio2 ≥30% Fio2 ≥70% Fio2 Grade III BPD >21% Fio2 ≥30% Fio2 Grade III(A) BPD Infants who die between 14 days to 36 wk PMA from respiratory failure secondary to severe parenchymal lung disease not attributable to other neonatal morbidities NICHD, National Institute of Child Health and Human Development; BPD, bronchopulmonary dysplasia; IPPV, invasive positive pressure ventilation; nCPAP, nasal continuous positive airway pressure; NIPPV, noninvasive positive pressure ventilation. Adapted from Higgins RD, Jobe AH, Koso-­Thomas M, et al. Bronchopulmonary dysplasia: executive summary of a workshop. J Pediatr. 2018;197:300–308. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 127  u  Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia  1087 prematurity (ROP), abnormal neurologic examination, poor brain growth, neurodevelopmental impairment, and CP. A strategy that utilizes a low cumulative dose (0.89 mg/kg of dexamethasone given over 10-­day taper) in preterm infants who remain ventilator depen- dent after 7 days of age (and therefore have a high risk of develop- ing BPD) facilitates weaning of ventilator and oxygen support and promotes successful extubation without an impact on long-­term outcomes, including the incidence of BPD or neurodevelopmen- tal impairment. The controversy concerning the appropriate use of systemic corticosteroids to prevent and/or treat BPD is ongoing, and until additional evidence is available, their use remains limited to infants with severe respiratory failure (ventilator dependent at >7-­14 days of age with significant respiratory and oxygen support needs) at high risk for imminent death. Inhaled corticosteroids (budesonide, fluticasone, and beclometha- sone) have been described as an alternative therapy in evolving or established BPD. Small randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and case reports in infants with established moderate to severe BPD have not shown a significant benefit for pulmonary mechanics or reduction in the need for ventilator or oxygen support. Inhaled fluticasone pro- pionate (corticosteroid) combined with salmeterol (long-­acting β2-­ agonist) may be beneficial. Pulmonary Vasodilators Many infants with evolving or established moderate and severe BPD demonstrate increased PVR caused by pulmonary microvas- cular maldevelopment and abnormal vasoreactivity. In infants with BPD with pulmonary hypertension, acute exposure to even modest levels of hypoxemia can cause PAP to increase abruptly. Maintain- ing infants with established BPD and pulmonary hypertension at higher So2 targets (92–96%) can lower PAP effectively. For infants in whom appropriate O2 supplementation and support of ventila- tion are ineffective, the use of low-­dose inhaled nitric oxide (iNO) may improve oxygenation anecdotally. Despite its frequent use, there is no evidence to support the use of iNO to improve lung func- tion, cardiac function, or oxygenation in evolving BPD. Several case series have reported on the use of the phosphodiesterase-­5 inhibitor sildenafil in treating pulmonary hypertension in established mod- erate to severe BPD. Despite its widespread use, no RCTs are evalu- ating the safety and efficacy of sildenafil in preterm infants with BPD. However, many experts would recommend a trial of low-­dose sildenafil (1 mg/kg/dose every 8 hours) for infants with evidence of pulmonary hypertension and persistent respiratory instability despite appropriate oxygen and ventilator support. Chronic Respiratory Support Experience suggests that maintaining functional residual capacity (FRC) with appropriate positive pressure support (with noninva- sive support whenever possible) promotes optimal lung growth and development. Provision of nCPAP until respiratory status improves and oxygen dependence resolves, with subsequent transition directly to room air, may be beneficial. Continuation of caffeine therapy may facilitate spontaneous breathing and weaning from support. Established severe BPD with cystic, heterogeneous lung disease often requires prolonged mechanical ventilation. A long inspiratory time is required to adequately ventilate diseased lung units, and appropriate expiratory time is required to allow exhala- tion. The use of a low rate (<20-­30 breaths/min), long inspiratory time (≥0.6 seconds) strategy is usually required. To attain appro- priate minute ventilation, larger tidal volumes (10-­15 mL/kg) may be necessary. Higher PEEP (often >6-­8 cm H2O) may be needed to attain adequate expansion and minimize gas-­trapping caused by dynamic airway collapse. Gradual weaning of ventilator settings should be attempted as the infant grows and lung disease improves, but the incidence of death or tracheostomy placement for chronic ventilation may be as high as 20%. By 2-­3 years of age, the majority of infants who undergo tracheostomy for severe BPD are success- fully liberated from mechanical ventilation. PROGNOSIS Compared with extremely preterm infants without BPD, infants with BPD have higher rates of neurodevelopmental impairment, lung diffusion impairment, wheezing and airflow obstruction, rehospitalization, and mortality. The risk of these complications increases with BPD severity. Infants with grade III BPD are most likely to either die or have long-­term respiratory morbidity. Pro- longed mechanical ventilation, intraventricular hemorrhage (IVH), pulmonary hypertension, cor pulmonale, and oxygen dependence beyond 1 year of life are poor prognostic signs. Mortality in infants with BPD ranges from 10–25% and is highest in infants who remain ventilator dependent for >6 months. Cardiorespiratory failure asso- ciated with cor pulmonale and acquired infection (respiratory syn- cytial virus [RSV]) are common causes of death. Infants are at risk for severe RSV infections and must receive prophylactic therapy (see Chapter 307). Pulmonary function slowly improves in most survivors because of ongoing lung repair and the natural period of lung growth and alveolarization. Rehospitalization for impaired pulmonary function is most common during the first 3 years of life and is much more common in infants requiring respiratory support at discharge. The incidence of physician-­diagnosed asthma, use of bronchodilators, and wheezing is elevated. Despite a gradual decrease in symptom frequency, persistence of respiratory symptoms and abnormal pul- monary function test results are measurable in children, adoles- cence, and young adults. Although not always clinically apparent, pulmonary function testing consistently reveals impaired exercise capacity, reduced pulmonary diffusing capacity, and persistent expiratory flow obstruction. High-­resolution chest CT scanning or MRI studies in children and adults with a history of BPD reveal lung abnormalities that correlate directly with the degree of pul- monary function abnormality. The ultimate long-­term pulmonary health of survivors of BPD is unknown. As trajectories of develop- ing lung function remain abnormal in survivors of BPD, concerns have been raised highlighting the potential for pulmonary emphy- sema, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and pulmonary vas- cular disease resulting in early debilitating lung dysfunction. Other complications of BPD include growth failure, neurodevelop- mental impairment, and parental stress, as well as sequelae of therapy, such as nephrolithiasis, osteopenia, and electrolyte imbalance. Airway problems such as vocal cord paralysis, subglottic stenosis, and tracheo- malacia are common and may aggravate or cause pulmonary hyper- tension. Subglottic stenosis may require tracheotomy or an anterior cricoid split procedure to relieve upper airway obstruction. Cardiac complications of BPD include pulmonary hypertension, cor pulmo- nale, systemic hypertension, left ventricular hypertrophy, and develop- ment of aortopulmonary collateral vessels, which, if large, may cause heart failure. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1088  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant INCIDENCE Transient tachypnea of the newborn (TTN) is a clinical syndrome of self-­ limited tachypnea associated with delayed clearance of fetal lung fluid. Although the actual incidence is likely underreported, it is estimated at 3-6 per 1,000 term infant births, making TTN the most common eti- ology of tachypnea in the newborn. Twin gestation, maternal asthma, maternal hypertension, late prematurity, precipitous delivery, perinatal depression, gestational diabetes, macrosomia, and cesarean delivery, particularly without labor, are common risk factors. ETIOLOGY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY TTN is believed to result from ineffective clearance of fetal lung fluid. Retained fetal lung fluid decreases pulmonary compliance and impedes gas exchange. Clearance of fetal lung fluid occurs through increased expression of epithelial sodium channels (ENaCs) and sodium-­potassium adenosine triphosphatase (Na+,K+-­ATPase) that drive active sodium (and thereby fluid) reabsorption. There is evi- dence that the channels involved in fluid clearance differ for infants with TTN. Additional lung fluid is cleared via compressive forces at the time of delivery and hydrostatic forces with the infant’s first breaths (see Chapter 124.1). Decreased respiratory effort can delay fluid clear- ance and increase the risk for TTN. CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS TTN is characterized by the early onset of tachypnea (>60 breaths/min), sometimes with retractions or expiratory grunting and occasionally with cyanosis that is relieved by minimal O2 supplementation (<40%). The chest generally sounds clear without crackles or wheeze, and the chest radiograph shows prominent perihilar pulmonary vascular markings, fluid in the intralobar fissures, and rarely small pleural effusions (Fig. 128.1). Hypercapnia and acidosis are uncommon. Respiratory failure requiring positive pressure support (either with nasal continuous posi- tive airway pressure [nCPAP] or mechanical ventilation) also is uncom- mon, but when it occurs usually resolves rapidly (<12-24 hours). Most infants recover with supportive care alone, and over the first 24-72 hours the tachypnea and O2 requirements slowly resolve. DIAGNOSIS Distinguishing TTN from respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) and other respiratory disorders (e.g., pneumonia) may be difficult, and transient tachypnea is frequently a diagnosis of exclusion. The dis- tinctive features of TTN are rapid recovery of the infant and the absence of radiographic findings for RDS (low lung volumes, diffuse reticulogranular pattern, air bronchograms) and other lung disor- ders. Other respiratory disorders to consider include meconium aspiration syndrome (see Chapter 129), persistent pulmonary hyper- tension of the newborn (see Chapter 130), congenital lung anomalies, and spontaneous air leak (see Chapter 132). Primary ciliary dyski- nesia (PCD) often presents in the newborn period and may resemble TTN or RDS. PCD in the newborn often lasts longer than TTN and requires a longer duration of oxygen therapy (Chapter 455). PREVENTION Prevention of TTN generally focuses on avoidance of modifiable risk fac- tors. As prematurity increases the risk of TTN, the American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology recommends against nonmedically indicated deliveries, either vaginal or cesarean, before 39 weeks. They further state that documentation of fetal lung maturity, previously accomplished via amniocentesis with amniotic fluid testing, should not be used to guide early delivery as this does not ensure appropriate maturation of physi- ologic processes. When late-­preterm delivery is medically indicated or threatened, the use of a single course of antenatal steroids is associated with a decreased risk of TTN and may be considered. Use of antenatal steroids at increasing gestational ages must be balanced against an increased risk of hypoglycemia in the neonate postpartum. TREATMENT Treatment for TTN is supportive. Based on the degree of symp- toms and progression of those symptoms over the first 2 hours after birth, transfer to a facility with appropriate neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) care may be required. Supplemental oxygen should be provided to maintain saturations over 90%. nCPAP can be used to support infants with more significant work of breathing or oxygen requirements. Further evaluation with chest radiograph or blood gas analysis can be undertaken when distress is more significant, or the diagnosis is in question. Infants with significant tachypnea may be unable or unsafe to feed orally and can be supported with intravenous fluids or nasogastric feedings. Generally, TTN is unre- lated to an underlying infection; however, antibiotic coverage may be initiated in patients with additional risk factors. Further evalu- ation for an alternate diagnosis should be undertaken if symptoms are not resolving by 72 hours of age. Inhaled β2-­agonists such as albuterol (salbutamol) increase expres- sion and activation of ENaC and Na+,K+-­ATPase and facilitate fluid clearance. Emerging evidence suggests that when given early in the course of TTN, albuterol may improve oxygenation, shorten the dura- tion of supplemental O2 therapy, and expedite recovery; however, more data are needed before employing this method. PROGNOSIS Infants with a history of TTN do have an increased risk of develop- ing a wheezing diagnosis during childhood. This association per- sists even after stratifying for the underlying risk factor of maternal asthma. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Chapter 128 Transient Tachypnea of the Newborn Alicia J. Sprecher, Krishna K. Acharya, and Susan S. Cohen Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 129  u  Aspiration of Foreign Material (Meconium Aspiration Syndrome, Aspiration Pneumonia)  1089 Fig. 128.1  Chest radiograph of an infant with transient tachypnea of the newborn. No- table features include increased pulmonary markings particularly in the perihilar region and fluid in the fissure. This contrasts with the radiograph of an infant with respiratory distress syndrome, which generally includes a homogenous ground glass appearance and hypoinflation. (From Alhassen Z, Vali P, Gugla- ni L, Lakshminrusimha S, Ryan RM. Recent ad- vances in pathophysiology and management of transient tachypnea of newborn. J Perinatol. 2021;41:6–16. Fig. 5.) “Sunburst” appearance Fluid in the minor fissure Mildly hyperexpanded lungs Minimal pleural effusion Streaky infiltrates Mild cardiomegaly Aspiration in the neonate can occur intrapartum often as a result of fetal distress or aspiration may occur postpartum, which can be related to a number of conditions including cardiopulmonary dysfunction, gastroesophageal reflux, aerodigestive tract anomalies, neurodevelop- mental impairment, and craniofacial abnormalities. INTRAPARTUM ASPIRATION With fetal distress, the fetus often initiates vigorous respiratory move- ments in utero because of interference with the supply of oxygen through the placenta. Under such circumstances, the infant may aspi- rate amniotic fluid containing vernix caseosa, epithelial cells, meco- nium, blood, or material from the birth canal, which may block the smallest airways and interfere with alveolar exchange of O2 and CO2. Pathogenic bacteria may accompany the aspirated material, and pneu- monia may ensue, but even in noninfected cases, respiratory distress accompanied by radiographic evidence of aspiration is seen (Fig. 129.1). The most relevant consequences of intrapartum aspiration are pneumonia and meconium aspiration syndrome (MAS). Early-­Onset Sepsis and Neonatal Pneumonia Pneumonia as a presentation of early-­onset sepsis typically arises fol- lowing aspiration of infected amniotic fluid (see Chapter 149). The incidence of early-­onset sepsis is 0.5 per 1,000 among term infants and increases to 1 per 1,000 among late preterm infants. The mortality rate is 2–3%. The most common causative agent is group B streptococcus Chapter 129 Aspiration of Foreign Material (Meconium Aspiration Syndrome, Aspiration Pneumonia) Alicia J. Sprecher, Krishna K. Acharya, and Susan S. Cohen (GBS; 40–45% of cases). Other causative agents include Escherichia coli and other gram-­negative rods (10–15% of cases), Enterococcus faecalis, Staphylococcus aureus, and Listeria monocytogenes. Bacteria within the airways causes direct mucosa injury, surfactant dysfunction, pulmonary edema, mechanical airway obstruction due to inflammation and debris, and can trigger vasoconstriction and pulmo- nary hypertension. Infants are particularly susceptible to infection due to immaturity of their innate and adaptive immune systems, a risk fac- tor that is more pronounced in premature or growth-­restricted infants. Additional risk factors for infection include being male, known mater- nal colonization with GBS, maternal fever, and prolonged rupture of membranes (>18 hours). Diagnosis of neonatal pneumonia includes radiographic evidence of infiltrate, and consolidation, and less often cavitation or pneu- matocele. Infants will display hypoxic and hypercarbic respiratory failure with frequent need for invasive ventilation; hypotension is common. Temperature instability, particularly hypothermia, is also common. White blood cell counts and single values of inflamma- tory markers have limited predictive potential. Blood cultures are indicated, and cerebrospinal fluid should be obtained if the blood culture is positive. Treatment of neonatal pneumonia includes the prompt initiation of empiric broad-­spectrum antibiotics. Commonly, ampicillin and an aminoglycoside (gentamicin) are used as first-­line therapy with the substitution of a cephalosporin or meropenem in place of the amino- glycoside when meningitis is a concern or in cases of suspected anti- biotic resistance. Therapy is typically 7-­14 days in duration and should be completed parenterally. Prevention of early-­onset sepsis has largely involved the targeted intrapartum antibiotic prophylaxis of mothers known to be colo- nized with GBS. GBS prophylaxis, generally penicillin, is indicated for women who screen positive for colonization via vaginal-­rectal culture at 36-­37 weeks’ gestation, have a history of an infant affected by GBS disease, or for preterm labor when GBS status is unknown. Additional broad-­spectrum antibiotic therapy is indicated for women with intra- partum fever to decrease risk of ascending infection. For more information on early-­onset sepsis see Chapter 149. Meconium Aspiration Syndrome Meconium-­stained amniotic fluid is found in 10–15% of births and usu- ally occurs in term or postterm infants. MAS develops in 5% of such infants; 30% require mechanical ventilation, and 3–5% die. Usually, but Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1090  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant not invariably, fetal distress and hypoxia occur before the passage of meconium into amniotic fluid. The infants are meconium stained and may be depressed and require resuscitation at birth. Either in utero or with the first breath, thick, particulate meconium is aspirated into the lungs. Partial obstruction of some airways may lead to pneumomedi- astinum, pneumothorax, or both. Overdistention of the chest may be prominent. Meconium within the lungs causes a chemical pneumoni- tis leading to surfactant dysfunction and inflammation (Fig. 129.1). The combination of airway obstruction and chemical injury can contribute to the development of persistent pulmonary hypertension of the new- born (PPHN; see Chapter 130). The pathophysiology of MAS is further described in Figure 129.2. The clinical presentation of MAS is that of respiratory distress and cyanosis. In cases where in utero hypoxia was present, the presen- tation of MAS may be compounded by hypoxic ischemic encepha- lopathy and multiorgan dysfunction (including myocardial injury). The condition usually improves within 72 hours, but when its course requires assisted ventilation, it may be severe, prolonged, and with a risk for mortality. Tachypnea may persist for many days or even several weeks. The typical chest radiograph is characterized by patchy infiltrates, coarse streaking of both lung fields, increased anteropos- terior diameter, and flattening of the diaphragm with possible pneu- mothorax (see Fig. 129.1). The risk of meconium aspiration may be decreased by rapid identification of fetal distress and initiation of prompt delivery. Intrapartum nasopharyngeal suctioning in infants with meconium-­ stained amniotic fluid does not reduce the risk for MAS. Routine intubation and aspiration of depressed infants (those with hypo- tonia, bradycardia, or decreased respiratory effort) born through meconium-­stained fluid is not effective in reducing the MAS or other major adverse outcomes and is not recommended for neo- natal resuscitation. The risk of meconium-­stained amniotic fluids increases with increasing gestational age. Additionally, among those infants with meconium-­stained fluids, the risk for MAS increases with increasing gestational age (4.8% at >42 weeks vs 2.6% at 40 weeks) therefore limiting significantly postterm deliveries (>42 weeks) decreases the incidence of MAS. Treatment of MAS includes supportive care and standard man- agement for respiratory distress. The beneficial effect of mean air- way pressure on oxygenation must be weighed against the risk of pneumothorax. Administration of exogenous surfactant and/or inhaled nitric oxide (iNO) to infants with MAS and hypoxemic respiratory failure, or pulmonary hypertension requiring mechani- cal ventilation, decreases the need for extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO), which is required by the most severely affected infants who show no response to therapy. In infants with MAS who demonstrate no other signs of sepsis, there is no role for continued antibiotic therapy. Severe meconium aspiration may be complicated by persistent pulmonary hypertension. Patients with MAS refractory to conventional mechanical ventilation may ben- efit from high-­frequency ventilation (HFV) or ECMO (see Chap- ter 130). Management may also include concurrent treatment for hypoxic injury as discussed in Chapter 120. The mortality rate of meconium-­stained infants is considerably higher than that of nonstained infants. The decline in neonatal deaths caused by MAS is related to improvements in obstetric and neonatal care. Residual lung problems are rare but include symptomatic cough, wheezing, and persistent hyperinflation for up to 5-­10 years. The ulti- mate prognosis depends on the extent of central nervous system injury from asphyxia and the presence of associated problems such as pulmo- nary hypertension. POSTPARTUM ASPIRATION Aspiration in the newborn after birth can be globally divided into cate- gories of anatomic abnormalities and swallowing dysfunction. Regard- less of the cause, the consequences of aspiration include pneumonia, chemical pneumonitis, and airway swelling. Anatomic Causes of Postpartum Aspiration Abnormalities of the aerodigestive tract can contribute to the pas- sage of oral secretions and milk into the lungs. Obstruction or nar- rowing of the nasal cavity or nasopharynx can interrupt the normal Physiologic meconium passage (particularly if postdates) Fetal compromise (hypoxia, cord compression, etc.)      meconium passage Meconium-stained amniotic fluid Post-partum aspiration In-utero gasping Meconium aspiration Continued compromise Peripheral airway obstruction Proximal airway obstruction Inflammatory and chemical pneumonitis Remodeling of pulmonary vasculature Partial Complete Ball-valve effect Atelectasis Air-trapping V/Q mismatch Air leaks Acidosis Hypoxemia Hypercapnea Persistent pulmonary hypertension Fig. 129.2  Pathophysiology of meconium passage and the meconi- um aspiration syndrome. V/Q, ventilation-­perfusion ratio. (From Wiswell TE, Bent RC. Meconium staining and the meconium aspiration syn- drome: unresolved issues. Pediatr Clin North Am. 1993;40:955–981.) Fig. 129.1  Anteroposterior chest radiograph of a term infant with meconium aspiration syndrome shows the typical pattern of mixed at- electasis and local emphysema. An endotracheal tube is seen in good position. Two chest tubes are present in the right chest without persis- tent pneumothorax. (From Rodriguez NE. Assessment of the neonatal and pediatric patient. In Heuer AJ, ed. Wilkins’ Clinical Assessment in Respiratory Care, 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Fig. 12.17) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 130  u  Persistent Pulmonary Hypertension of the ­Newborn (Persistent Fetal Circulation)  1091 suck-­swallow-­breath cycle of the infant and increase the risk of aspiration. These conditions include genetic disorders associated with midface hypoplasia, choanal atresia, and congenital nasal masses or tumors. Infants with nasal obstruction will present with stertor, cyanosis improved with crying, and an inability to pass a nasal feeding tube. Oral sources of aspiration include micrognathia/ retrognathia and oral masses that compromise airway protection. Cleft lip and palate can impair velopharyngeal closure and increase nasal regurgitation of milk with subsequent aspiration. Anatomic causes of aspiration at the level of the larynx include laryngomala- cia due to increased work of breathing with poorer airway protec- tive mechanisms, laryngotracheoesophageal clefts, and vocal fold paralysis or paresis where aspiration occurs as the vocal folds are unable to adduct and protect the airway. Tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) contributes to aspiration via a direct connection between the esophagus and the airway. TEF can be divided into five types based on the location of the fistula and presence of esophageal atresia. Prenatal diagnosis may occur after the recognition of polyhydram- nios and a small fetal stomach. Postnatal symptoms include exces- sive salivation that worsen with feeding attempts, choking, cough, cyanosis, respiratory distress, and an inability to pass an orogastric (OG) tube. TEF should prompt an evaluation for other anomalies. When an anatomic abnormality is believed to be contributing to aspiration, initial management should include cessation of feeding pending an evaluation. Some conditions including vocal fold paresis and laryngomalacia may resolve spontaneously, and modified feeding strategies, often under the direction of a speech language pathologist, can allow delivery of nutrition until the condition improves with time and growth. Cleft palate can often be managed with feeding modi- fication until surgical repair in infancy. Other conditions including choanal atresia and TEF require surgical intervention in the newborn period. In some cases, tracheostomy is required for infants unable to adequately protect their airway. Although reflux alone is not the cause of aspiration in these cases, decreasing the acidity of the aspi- rate may decrease airway swelling, and antireflux medications can be considered in select populations. Swallowing Dysfunction Swallowing dysfunction is another cause of aspiration in the new- born. Swallowing is a complex process and must be coordinated with respirations. Infants with neurologic injury may display abnor- malities in the swallowing reflex or in the recognition and preven- tion of aspiration. Infants with pulmonary or cardiovascular disease leading to tachypnea will have more trouble coordinating a suck-­ swallow-­breath cycle. Premature infants are more likely to have swallowing dysfunction because of prematurity-­related pulmonary insufficiency and because of immaturity of the swallow mecha- nism, which begins to mature between 32 and 34 weeks. Hypotonic infants due to neuromuscular diseases or as a sequalae of hypoxic-­ ischemic encephalopathy are at increased risk of aspiration. Evaluation of the swallow in at-­risk infants often occurs with the assistance of a speech language pathologist and may include video fluoroscopic swallow studies to evaluate swallowing pattern and document aspiration. A fiberoptic endoscopic evaluation of the swallow (FEES) is another strategy whereby a speech language pathologist and ear, nose, and throat doctor observe a small-­volume swallow via direct endoscopic visualization. Neurologic imaging may be indicated to assess for the underlying etiology of an ineffec- tive or uncoordinated swallow. Treatment strategies include feeding modifications such as pac- ing (tilting the bottle down every three to five sucks to allow recov- ery time), modified feeding position, or using a slower flow nipple. In cases where feeding modification does not adequately improve swallow safety, a percutaneous gastric tube for feeding may be indicated. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Chapter 130 Persistent Pulmonary Hypertension of the ­Newborn (Persistent Fetal Circulation) Alicia J. Sprecher, Krishna K. Acharya, and Susan S. Cohen Persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn (PPHN) pre- dominantly occurs in term and postterm infants. Predisposing factors include birth asphyxia, meconium aspiration syndrome (MAS), early-­ onset sepsis, respiratory distress syndrome (RDS), hypoglycemia, poly- cythemia, maternal use of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs with in utero constriction of the ductus arteriosus, maternal late trimester use of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, and pulmonary hypo- plasia caused by diaphragmatic hernia (Table 130.1). PPHN is often idiopathic. Some patients with PPHN have low plasma arginine and nitric oxide (NO) metabolite concentrations and polymorphisms of the carbamoyl phosphate synthase gene, findings suggestive of a pos- sible subtle defect in NO production. The incidence is 1 in 500-­1,500 live births, with a wide variation among clinical centers. Regardless of etiology of PPHN, profound hypoxemia from right-­to-­left shunting and normal or elevated Paco2 are present (Fig. 130.1). PATHOPHYSIOLOGY Persistence of the fetal circulatory pattern of right-­to-­left shunting through the patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) and foramen ovale after birth is a result of excessively high pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR). Fetal PVR is usually elevated relative to fetal systemic or post- natal pulmonary pressure. This fetal state normally permits shunting of oxygenated umbilical venous blood to the left atrium (and brain) through the foramen ovale, from which it bypasses the lungs through the ductus arteriosus and passes to the descending aorta. After birth, PVR normally declines rapidly as a consequence of vasodilation sec- ondary to lung inflation, a rise in postnatal Pao2, a reduction in Paco2, increased pH, and release of vasoactive substances. Increased neonatal PVR may be (1) maladaptive from an acute injury (not demonstrat- ing normal vasodilation in response to increased O2 and other changes after birth); (2) the result of increased pulmonary artery medial muscle thickness and extension of smooth muscle layers into the usually non- muscular, more peripheral pulmonary arterioles in response to chronic fetal hypoxia; (3) a consequence of pulmonary hypoplasia (diaphrag- matic hernia, Potter syndrome); or (4) obstructive as a result of poly- cythemia, total anomalous pulmonary venous return (TAPVR), or congenital diffuse development disorders of acinar lung development. CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS PPHN usually manifests in the delivery room or within the first 12 hours after birth. Idiopathic PPHN or PPHN related to polycythemia, hypogly- cemia, hypothermia, or asphyxia may result in severe cyanosis and respi- ratory distress. In some cases, however, initial signs of respiratory distress may be minimal. Infants who have PPHN associated with meconium aspi- ration, group B streptococcal pneumonia, diaphragmatic hernia, or pul- monary hypoplasia usually exhibit cyanosis, grunting, flaring, retractions, tachycardia, and shock. Multiorgan involvement may be present. Myo- cardial ischemia, papillary muscle dysfunction with mitral and tricuspid regurgitation, and biventricular dysfunction produce cardiogenic shock with decreases in pulmonary blood flow, tissue perfusion, and O2 delivery. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1092  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant Hypoxemia is often labile and out of proportion to the findings on chest radiographs. In PPHN due to asphyxia and idiopathic PPHN, chest x-­ray findings are often normal, whereas in PPHN associated with pneumonia and diaphragmatic hernia, parenchymal opacification and bowel/liver in the chest, respectively, are seen. DIAGNOSIS Independent of the prenatal history, PPHN should be suspected in all term infants who have cyanosis. Hypoxemia is universal and inter- mittently unresponsive to 100% O2 given by oxygen hood or nasal cannula. A Pao2 or Sao2 gradient between a preductal (right radial artery) and a postductal (umbilical artery) site of blood sampling sug- gests right-­to-­left shunting through the ductus arteriosus. Intracardiac shunting through the patent foramen ovale does not lead to a Pao2 or Sao2 gradient. Real-­time echocardiography combined with Doppler flow imaging is very helpful in evaluating PPHN. Systolic flattening of the interven- tricular septum as the right ventricular systolic pressure approaches the left ventricular systolic pressure can be used to estimate the degree of pulmonary hypertension. The peak velocity of the tricuspid valve regurgitation jet, when present, yields a quantitative estimate of the right ventricular systolic pressure. Likewise, the direction and velocity of a shunt across the PDA provides a quantitative comparison between the aortic and pulmonary artery pressures. In advanced cases, right-­to-­ left or bidirectional shunting across a PDA and a patent foramen ovale can be observed. The differential diagnosis of PPHN includes cyanotic heart disease (especially obstructed TAPVR), idiopathic pulmonary vein stenosis, congenital surfactant (protein) deficiency syndromes, pulmonary artery thrombosis, and congenital diffuse development disorders of acinar lung development (acinar dysplasia, congenital alveolar dysplasia, and alveo- lar capillary dysplasia with misalignment of the pulmonary veins). Alveolocapillary dysplasia (ACD) is a rare, lethal autosomal reces- sive disorder of distal lung development characterized by immature lobular development and reduced capillary density. Infants with ACD Hypoxia, hypercarbia, acidosis ↑ right to left shunting at PDA and FO ↑ PVR SVR ↓ Pulmonary Vascular (structural changes; altered reactivity to dilator and constrictor stimuli) Lung ↓ lung volume ↓ compliance ↑ intrapulmonary shunt Heart (RV pressure overload, hypotension, and LV dysfunction) Fig. 130.1  Cardiopulmonary interactions in persistent pulmonary hy- pertension of the newborn (PPHN). FO, Foramen ovale; LV, left ventri- cle; PDA, patent ductus arteriosus; PVR, pulmonary vascular resistance; RV, right ventricle; SVR, systemic vascular resistance. (From Kinsella JP, Abman SH. Recent developments in the pathophysiology and treat- ment of persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn. J Pediatr. 1995;126:853–864.) Restrictive ductus or right heart failure, consider PGE1 IV Initial stabilization Oxygen CPAP/mechanical ventilation HFV if parenchymal lung disease Early surfactant administration iNO if OI >15 despite optimizing ventilation (1st line) If severe PPHN (OI >25) Consider adjuvant therapies (2nd line) • Iloprost inhaled (immediate onset, short lasting) • If response, Treprostinil (subQ/IV) • If no response, Sildenafil oral/IV (onset of action 6-12h) Optimize BP with fluids, vasopressors, steroids Bosentan oral (3rd line) (slow onset, unreliable absorption) OI >40 on serial ABGs or significant cardiovascular instability ECMO Decreased myocardial function, add milrinone IV Fig. 130.2  Algorithm for the suggested approach and timing of interventions for the management of hypoxic respiratory failure (HRF)/persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn (PPHN). It is important to consider cardiopulmonary system to be one fully integrat- ed unit and optimize lung recruitment, pulmonary vasodilation, and car- diac function to facilitate successful transition. The algorithm focuses on vasodilator agents and is not meant to be inclusive of all therapies used in the management of PPHN. ABG, Arterial blood gas; BP, blood pres- sure; CPAP, continuous positive airway pressure; ECMO, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation; HFV, high-­frequency ventilation; iNO, inhaled nitric oxide; IV, intravenous; OI, oxygenation index; PGE1, prostaglan- din E1; subQ, subcutaneous. (From Sharma M, Callan E, Konduri GG. Pulmonary vasodilator therapy in persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn. Clin Perinatol. 2022;49:103–105, Fig. 3.) Table 130.1     Etiology of Persistent Pulmonary Hypertension of the Newborn in Neonates Maladaptation of pulmonary vasculature (abnormal, “reactive” pulmonary vasoconstriction) • Parenchymal lung diseases, such as meconium aspiration syndrome (MAS), respiratory distress syndrome (RDS), and pneumonia • In response to systemic disorders, such as hypothermia, sepsis, fetal hypoxia/distress, hypercapnia, acidosis, and hyperviscosity • Toxic/pharmacologic exposure in utero (maternal selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) use) Maldevelopment of pulmonary vasculature (remodeling of pulmonary vasculature) • In utero closure of ductus arteriosus (maternal cyclooxygenase inhibitor use) • Sustained pulmonary over circulation in congenital heart disease with large left-­to-­right shunts • Intrauterine growth restriction • Genetic/chromosomal anomalies (trisomy 21, alveolar-­capillary dysplasia, surfactant protein deficiency) Underdevelopment of pulmonary vasculature (hypoplastic pulmonary vessels; ↓ cross-­sectional area) • Congenital diaphragmatic hernia • Pulmonary hypoplasia (premature prolonged rupture of membranes, oligohydramnios and anhydramnios, space-­ occupying lesions in the chest). From Sharma M, Callan E, Konduri GG. Pulmonary vasodilator therapy in persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn. Clin Perinatol. 2022;49:103–105. Box 1. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 130  u  Persistent Pulmonary Hypertension of the ­Newborn (Persistent Fetal Circulation)  1093 present with idiopathic PPHN, demonstrating little or no parenchymal lung disease and profound hypoxemia. Over 60% of infants with ACD manifest hypoxemia and respiratory failure within 48 hours of birth, while some with milder disease present beyond 6 months of age. The diagnosis is made on autopsy in 90% of cases, and the constellation of findings include thickened alveolar septa, increased muscularization of the pulmonary arterioles, a reduced number of capillaries, with the remaining capillaries demonstrating abnormal apposition to the air interface, and misalignment of the intrapulmonary veins. In up to 80% of cases, extrapulmonary malformations of the genitourinary, gastro- intestinal, or cardiovascular system are present. Pathogenic variants in the transcription factor gene FOXFI have been identified in up to 40% of cases, but the diagnosis continues to rest on clinical and histopatho- logic features. There also may be associated gastrointestinal (malro- tation), genitourinary, and cardiac (hypoplastic left heart syndrome) malformations. ACD is uniformly lethal and should be suspected in infants with idiopathic PPHN who fail to respond to maximal medical therapy, or when symptoms recur after successful weaning from extra- corporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO). In a UK ECMO report, up to 14% of infants who failed ECMO ultimately were diagnosed with ACD. Regardless of the timing of presentation, ACD is uniformly fatal, and lung transplantation remains the sole, experimental therapy. TREATMENT Therapy for PPHN is directed toward correcting any predisposing condition (e.g., hypoglycemia, polycythemia) and improving poor tis- sue oxygenation by addressing the underlying pathology (Fig. 130.2). Initial management includes O2 administration and correction of aci- dosis, hypotension, and hypercapnia. Persistent hypoxemia should be managed with intubation and mechanical ventilation. Infants with PPHN are usually managed without hyperventilation or alkalization. Gentle ventilation with normocarbia or permissive hyper- carbia and avoidance of hypoxemia result in excellent outcomes and a low incidence of chronic lung disease and ECMO use. Because of their instability and ability to fight the ventilator, new- borns with PPHN usually require sedation. Nonpharmacologic mea- sures such as minimal noise, light, and tactile stimulation are also employed. The use of paralytic agents is controversial and reserved for the newborn who cannot be treated with sedatives alone. Mus- cle relaxants may promote atelectasis of dependent lung regions and ventilation-­perfusion mismatch and may be associated with an increased risk of death. Inotropic therapy is frequently needed to support blood pressure and perfusion. Whereas epinephrine is frequently used as a first-­line agent, other agents, such as dobutamine and milrinone, may be helpful when myocardial contractility is poor. Many centers use echo-­guided assessment of cardiac function to choose appropriate inotropic therapy. Dopamine is typically avoided due to its ability to increase PVR. Some of the sickest newborns with PPHN demonstrate hypotension refrac- tory to vasopressor administration. This results from desensitization of the cardiovascular system to catecholamines by overwhelming illness and relative adrenal insufficiency. Hydrocortisone rapidly upregulates cardiovascular adrenergic receptor expression and serves as a hormone substitute in cases of adrenal insufficiency. Inhaled nitric oxide (iNO) is an endothelium-­derived signaling molecule that relaxes vascular smooth muscle and can be delivered to the lung by inhalation. Use of iNO reduces the need for ECMO support by approximately 40%. The optimal starting dose is 20 ppm. Higher doses have not been shown to be more effective and are associated with side effects, including methemoglobinemia and increased lev- els of nitrogen dioxide, a pulmonary irritant. Most newborns require iNO for <5 days. Although iNO has been used as long-­term therapy in children and adults with primary pulmonary hypertension, prolonged dependency is rare in neonates and suggests the presence of lung hypo- plasia, congenital heart disease, or ACD. The maximal safe duration of iNO therapy is unknown. The infant can be weaned to 5 ppm after 6-­24 hours of therapy. The dose can then be reduced slowly and discon- tinued when Fio2 is <0.6 and the iNO dose is 1 ppm. Abrupt discon- tinuation should be avoided because it may cause rebound pulmonary hypertension. iNO should be used only at institutions that offer ECMO support or have the capability of transporting an infant on iNO therapy if a referral for ECMO is necessary. Some infants with PPHN do not respond adequately to iNO. Therapy with continuous inhaled or intra- venous (IV) prostacyclin (prostaglandin I2) can improve oxygenation in infants with PPHN. The safety and efficacy of sildenafil (type 5 phos- phodiesterase inhibitor) in newborns with PPHN is under investiga- tion; initial results are promising. In 5–10% of patients with PPHN, the response to 100% O2, mechan- ical ventilation, and drugs is poor, and many of these infants benefit from ECMO. In such patients, two parameters have been used to pre- dict mortality: the alveolar-­arterial oxygen gradient (Pa-­ao2), and the oxygenation index (OI), calculated as Fio2 (as %) × MAP/Pao2. A Pa-­ao2 >600 for 8-­12 hours and an OI >40 unresponsive to iNO predict a high mortality rate (>80%) and are indications for ECMO. In carefully selected, severely ill infants with hypoxemic respiratory failure caused by RDS, meconium aspiration pneumonia, congenital diaphragmatic hernia, PPHN, or sepsis, ECMO significantly improves survival. ECMO is a form of cardiopulmonary bypass that augments sys- temic perfusion and provides gas exchange. Most experience has been with venoarterial bypass, which requires carotid artery ligation and the placement of large catheters in the right internal jugular vein and carotid artery. Venovenous bypass avoids carotid artery ligation and provides gas exchange, but it does not support cardiac output. Blood is initially pumped through the ECMO circuit at a rate that approximates 80% of the estimated cardiac output (150-­200 mL/kg/min). Venous return passes through a membrane oxygenator, is rewarmed, and returns to the aortic arch in venoarterial ECMO and to the right atrium in venovenous ECMO. Venous O2 saturation values are used to moni- tor tissue O2 delivery and subsequent extraction for infants undergoing venoarterial ECMO, whereas arterial O2 saturation values are used to monitor oxygenation for infants receiving venovenous ECMO. Because ECMO requires complete heparinization to prevent clot- ting in the circuit, its use is generally avoided in patients with existing intracranial hemorrhage or who are at high risk of developing intra- ventricular hemorrhage (weight <2 kg, gestational age <34 weeks). In addition, infants being considered for ECMO should have reversible lung disease, no signs of systemic bleeding, and no severe asphyxia or lethal malformations, and they should have been ventilated for <10 days. Complications of ECMO include thromboembolism, air embo- lization, bleeding, stroke, seizures, atelectasis, cholestatic jaundice, thrombocytopenia, neutropenia, hemolysis, infectious complications of blood transfusions, edema formation, and systemic hypertension. PROGNOSIS Survival in patients with PPHN varies with the underlying diagnosis but is generally ∼90%. Long-­term, survivors of PPHN are at risk for neurodevelopmental impairment and sensorineural deafness, which can occur in about 25% of patients. The outcome for infants with PPHN who are treated with ECMO is also favorable; >80–90% survive, and 60–75% of survivors appear normal at 1-­3.5 years of age. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1094  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant A diaphragmatic hernia is defined as a communication between the abdominal and thoracic cavities with or without abdominal con- tents in the thorax (Fig. 131.1). The etiology is rarely traumatic and usually congenital. The symptoms and prognosis depend on the location of the defect and associated anomalies. The defect may be at the esophageal hiatus (hiatal hernia); paraesophageal, adjacent to the hiatus (paraesophageal hernia; see Chapter 131.2); retrosternal (foramen of Morgagni hernia; see Chapter 131.1); or at the posterolateral portion of the diaphragm (Bochdalek hernia). In congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH), the Bochdalek hernia accounts for up to 90% of the hernias seen, with 80–90% occurring on the left side. The Morgagni hernia accounts for 2–6% of CDH. The size of the defect is highly variable, ranging from a small hole to complete agenesis of this area of the diaphragm. These lesions may cause significant respiratory distress at birth, can be associated with other congenital anomalies, and have significant mortality and long-­term morbidity. CONGENITAL DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIA (BOCHDALEK) Pathology and Etiology Although CDH is characterized by a structural diaphragmatic defect, a major limiting factor for survival is the association with other anom- alies, syndromes, and primarily with pulmonary hypoplasia. Lung hypoplasia was initially thought to be solely caused by the compression of the lung from the herniated abdominal contents, which impaired lung growth. However, evidence indicates that pulmonary hypoplasia, at least in some cases, may precede the development of the diaphrag- matic defect. Pulmonary hypoplasia is characterized by a reduction in pulmonary mass and the number of bronchial divisions, respiratory bronchioles, and alveoli. The pathology of pulmonary hypoplasia and CDH includes abnormal septa in the terminal saccules, thickened alveoli, and thick- ened pulmonary arterioles. Biochemical abnormalities include relative surfactant deficiencies, increased glycogen in the alveoli, and decreased levels of phosphatidylcholine, total DNA, and total lung protein, all of which contribute to limited gas exchange. Epidemiology The incidence of CDH is between 1 in 2,000 and 1 in 3,000 live births, with males affected more often than females. Defects are more com- mon on the left (85%) and are occasionally bilateral (<5%). Pul- monary hypoplasia and malrotation of the intestine are part of the lesion, not associated anomalies. Most cases of CDH are nonsyn- dromic (sporadic; 60%), but familial and syndromic cases have been reported. Associated anomalies in nonsyndromic patients have been reported in up to 30% of cases, including hypoplastic left heart syn- drome and accessory spleens. CDH is recognized as part of several aneuploidy syndromes: trisomies 21, 13, and 18 and those with copy number variation: del 15q26.1-­q26.2, del 8p23.1, del 1q41-­q42, and del 4p16.3 as well as definable single gene syndromes including Cor- nelia de Lange, Donnai-­Barrow, Cutis Laxa, cardiac-­urogenital, and Matthew-­Wood syndromes. Diagnosis and Clinical Presentation In >50% of cases, CDH can be diagnosed on prenatal ultrasonog- raphy (US) between 16 and 24 weeks of gestation. High-­speed fetal MRI can further define the lesion. US findings may include polyhy- dramnios, chest mass, mediastinal shift, gastric bubble or a liver in the thoracic cavity, and fetal hydrops. Certain imaging features may predict outcome including liver position in the chest, observed-­to-­ expected total lung volume (O/E TLV), and observed-­to-­expected lung-­to-­head ratio (O/E LHR). Nonetheless, no definitive character- istic reliably predicts outcome. After delivery, a chest radiograph is needed to confirm the diagnosis (Fig. 131.2). In some infants with an echogenic chest mass, further imaging is required. The differential diagnosis may include other diaphragm disorders, such as eventra- tion or a cystic lung lesion (pulmonary sequestration, cystic adeno- matoid malformation). Arriving at the diagnosis early in pregnancy allows for prenatal counseling, possible fetal interventions (see Chapter 118), and plan- ning for postnatal care. A referral to a center providing high-­risk obstetrics, pediatric surgery, and tertiary care neonatology is advised. Careful evaluation for other anomalies should include echocardiogra- phy and amniocentesis. To avoid unnecessary pregnancy termination and unrealistic expectations, an experienced multidisciplinary group must carefully counsel the parents of a child diagnosed with a dia- phragmatic hernia. Respiratory distress is a cardinal sign in babies with CDH. It may occur immediately after birth, or there may be a period of up to 48 hours during which the baby is relatively stable. Respiratory distress Chapter 131 Diaphragmatic Hernia Krishna K. Acharya, Alicia J. Sprecher, and Susan S. Cohen Normal diaphragm Bochdalek diaphragmatic defect with herniation of small lung A B Fig. 131.1  A, Normal diaphragm separating the abdominal and tho- racic cavity. B, Diaphragmatic hernia with a small lung and abdominal contents in the thoracic cavity. A B Fig. 131.2  Bochdalek hernia. A, Chest radiograph showing herniated bowel loops in the left hemithorax, displacement of the mediastinum to the contralateral side, severely reduced lung space, and unclear lung fields bilaterally. B, Upper gastrointestinal tract radiograph showing the stomach and bowel loops stained with contrast in the left hemithorax. (From Hu X, Liu B. Bochdalek hernia. Lancet. 2018;392:60.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 131  u  Diaphragmatic Hernia  1095 is characterized clinically by tachypnea, grunting, use of accessory muscles, and cyanosis. Children with CDH may also have a scaphoid abdomen and increased chest wall diameter. Bowel sounds may also be heard in the chest with decreased breath sounds bilaterally. The point of maximal cardiac impulse may be displaced away from the side of the hernia if mediastinal shift has occurred. A chest radio- graph and passage of a gastric tube are usually sufficient to confirm the diagnosis. A small group of infants with CDH present beyond the neonatal period. Patients with a delayed presentation may experience vomiting as a result of intestinal obstruction or mild respiratory symptoms. Occasionally, incarceration of the intestine proceeds to ischemia with sepsis and shock. Unrecognized diaphragmatic hernia is a rare cause of sudden death in infants and toddlers. Group B streptococcal sepsis has been associated with delayed onset of symptoms and a CDH (often right side). Treatment Initial Management Delivery at a tertiary center with experience in the management of CDH is required to provide early, appropriate respiratory support. In the delivery room, infants with respiratory distress should be rapidly stabilized with endotracheal intubation. Prolonged mask ventilation in the delivery room, which enlarges the stomach and small bowel and thus makes oxygenation more difficult, must be avoided and a nasogas- tric or orogastric tube placed immediately for decompression. Once in the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU), central arterial and venous (umbilical) lines are placed, pre-­ and postductal saturations moni- tored, and gastric contents intermittently decompressed to prevent enlargement. A preductal arterial oxygen saturation (Spo2) value ≥85% should be the minimum goal. An initial arterial Pco2 >80 mm Hg is predictive of mortality in infants with CDH. Volutrauma is a significant problem. Gentle ventilation with permissive hypercap- nia reduces lung injury, need for extracorporeal membrane oxygen (ECMO), and mortality. Factors that contribute to persistent pulmo- nary hypertension of the newborn (PPHN; hypoxia, acidosis, hypo- thermia) should be avoided (see Chapter 130). Echocardiography is important to guide therapeutic decisions by measuring pulmonary and system vascular pressures and defining the presence of cardiac dysfunction. Routine use of inotropes is indicated in the presence of left ventricular dysfunction. Neonates with CDH may be surfac- tant deficient. Although surfactant is frequently used, no study has proved that it is beneficial in treatment of CDH, and it may precipi- tate decompensation. In infants with severe respiratory failure and hypoxemia, sedation and paralysis may be required. Ventilation Strategies Conventional mechanical ventilation, high-­frequency oscillatory ven- tilation (HFOV), and ECMO are the three main strategies to support respiratory failure in the newborn with CDH. The goal is to maintain oxygenation and CO2 elimination without inducing volutrauma. Con- ventional ventilation using a gentle, lung protective strategy (peak inspiratory pressure [PIP] <25, positive end-­expiratory pressure [PEEP] 3-­5 cm H2O) that allows for permissive hypercapnia (Paco2 <65 mm Hg) is recommended. Permissive hypercapnia (as opposed to hyperventilation with high PIP) has reduced lung injury and improved survival. HFOV as a rescue therapy is indicated if a PIP >25 is required to maintain appropriate ventilation or if hypoxemia persists. Inhaled nitric oxide (iNO) is a selective pulmonary vasodilator. Its use reduces ductal shunting and pulmonary pressures and results in improved oxygenation. Although iNO has been helpful in PPHN, ran- domized trials have not demonstrated improved survival or reduced need for ECMO when iNO is used in newborns with CDH. Nonethe- less, iNO is used in patients with CDH as a bridge to ECMO. Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation The availability of ECMO and the utility of preoperative stabilization has improved survival of babies with CDH. ECMO is the therapeutic option for children in whom conventional ventilation or HFOV fails. ECMO is most often used before repair of the defect. Several objective criteria for ECMO have been developed. Birthweight and the 5-­minute Apgar score may be the best predictors of outcome in patients treated with ECMO. There is no strict lower weight limit for ECMO, but gener- ally, vessels in infants <1,800 g are too small to cannulate. The duration of ECMO for neonates with diaphragmatic hernia is lon- ger (than for those with isolated PPHN or meconium aspiration and may last up to 2-­4 weeks). Timing of repair of the diaphragm while the infant receives ECMO is controversial; some experts prefer early repair to allow a greater duration of ECMO after the repair, whereas many defer repair until the infant has demonstrated the ability to tolerate weaning from ECMO. The recurrence of pulmonary hypertension is associated with high mortal- ity and weaning from ECMO support should be cautious. If the patient cannot be weaned from ECMO after repair of CDH, redirection of care toward comfort is usually offered to families. Prenatal Markers of Severity and Fetal Treatment The most studied prenatal predictor of outcome in children with CDH studied is fetal US. A prospective study of US at 24-­26 weeks compared fetal LHR with mortality. There were no survivors with LHR <1, but all babies with LHR >1.4 survived. A second important consideration is the presence of liver in the thoracic cavity, which is a poor prognostic feature. Because LHR measurements increase with gestation, an O/E LHR is con- sidered a more reliable predictor of severity irrespective of GA. O/E LHR of ≥45% is considered a good prognostic sign, whereas <25% is considered a poor prognostic sign. Fetal MRI is used at many fetal centers at 28-­32 weeks for prognostication. The advantages of fetal MRI are that they are operator independent, allow measurement of both lungs, and allow better tissue contrast and better images. Normal reference values for fetal lung volumes on MRI have been published and TLV can be compared with the referent fetus. O/E TLV ≥45% is a good prognostic sign, whereas <25% is considered a poor prognostic sign. Based on the observation that hydrostatic pressure exerted by fetal lung fluid plays a critical role in lung growth and maturity, a promis- ing fetal therapy is in utero tracheal occlusion (fetoscopic endoluminal tracheal occlusion [FETO]). FETO therapy at 27–29 weeks’ gestation improves survival from 15% to 40% in fetuses with severe left CDH with O/E LHR of <25%; preterm birth is a risk factor. FETO therapy is only offered at a select few centers across the United States (see Chapter 118). Surgical Repair Most experts plan surgery at least 48 hours after stabilization and reso- lution of the pulmonary hypertension. Good relative indicators of sta- bility are the requirement for conventional ventilation only, a low PIP, and Fio2 <50%. If the newborn is receiving ECMO, an ability to be weaned from this support should be a consideration before surgical repair. In some centers, the repair is done with the cannulas in place; in other centers the cannulas are removed. A subcostal approach is most frequently used (Fig. 131.3). This allows for good visualization of the defect, and if the abdominal cavity cannot accommodate the herniated contents, a polymeric silicone (Silastic) patch can be placed, commonly known as a silo. Both laparoscopic and thoracoscopic repairs have been reported, but these should be reserved for only the most stable infants. The defect size and amount of native diaphragm present are variable. Whenever possible, a primary repair using native tissue is performed. If the defect is too large, a porous polytetrafluoroethylene (Gore-­Tex) patch is used. Following surgical repair, the infant must be carefully monitored for worsening pulmonary hypertension. In some patients, a postoperative course of ECMO is needed. Other recognized complications include bleeding, chylothorax, and bowel obstruction. CDH recurrence can occur in about 10% of cases, usually during the first year of life, but can occur up to the first 5 years of life. There is a higher recurrence rate of CDH in children with patches (the patch does not grow as the child grows) than in those with native tissue repairs, those with larger defects, and those with liver in the defect. A loosely fitted patch may reduce the recurrence rates. Outcome and Long-­Term Survival Overall survival of liveborn infants with CDH is 75%. Relative predictors of a poor prognosis include an associated major anomaly and syndromes, Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1096  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant severe pulmonary hypoplasia, herniation to the contralateral lung, and the need for ECMO. The size of the defect appears to be the strongest predictor of morbidity. Pulmonary problems continue to be a source of morbidity for long-­ term survivors of CDH. Children receiving CDH repair who were stud- ied at 6-­11 years of age demonstrated significant decreases in forced expiratory flow at 50% of vital capacity and decreased peak expiratory flow. Chronic lung disease can occur in about 15% of patients. Both obstructive and restrictive patterns can occur. Those without severe pulmonary hypertension and volutrauma do the best. Those at high- est risk include children who required ECMO and patch repair, but the data clearly show that CDH survivors who did not require ECMO also need frequent attention to pulmonary issues. At discharge, up to 20% of infants require oxygen, but only 1–2% require oxygen past 1 year of age. Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is reported in >50% of children with CDH. GERD is more common in children whose dia- phragmatic defect involves the esophageal hiatus. Intestinal obstruc- tion is reported in up to 20% of children and may result from a midgut volvulus, adhesions, or a recurrent hernia that became incarcerated. Children with CDH typically have delayed growth in the first 2 years of life. Contributing factors include poor intake, GERD, and a caloric requirement that may be higher because of the energy required to breathe. Many children normalize and “catch up” in growth by the time they are 2 years old. Neurocognitive defects are common and may result from the disease or the interventions. The incidence of neurologic abnormalities is higher in infants who require ECMO (67% vs 24% of those who do not). The abnormalities are similar to those seen in neonates treated with ECMO for other diagnoses and include transient and permanent developmental delay, abnormal hearing or vision, and seizures. Serious hearing loss may occur in up to 28% of children who underwent ECMO. The majority of neurologic abnormalities are classified as mild to moderate. Other long-­term problems include pectus excavatum and scoliosis. Survivors of CDH repair, particularly those requiring ECMO support, have a variety of long-­term abnormalities that appear to improve with time but require close monitoring and multidisciplinary support. Health-­related quality of life (HRQoL) of school-­age children born with CDH is overall good and comparable to healthy children, although some children report lower quality of life. The burden of the child’s diagnosis on families long-­term is also reportedly low. ECMO use is associated with a lower HRQoL in certain domains, as is the need for special education services in school, and chronic respiratory problems. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 131.1  Foramen of Morgagni Hernia Krishna K. Acharya, Alicia J. Sprecher, and Susan S. Cohen Failure of the sternal and crural portions of the diaphragm to meet and fuse produces the foramen of Morgagni hernia. These defects are usu- ally small, with a greater transverse than anteroposterior diameter, and are more often right sided (90%) but may be bilateral. The transverse colon, small intestine, or liver is usually contained in the hernial sac. Most children with these defects are asymptomatic and are diagnosed beyond the neonatal period, often by chest radiograph performed for evaluation of another condition. The anterolateral radiograph shows a structure behind the heart, and a lateral film localizes the mass to the retrosternal area. Chest CT or MRI confirms the diagnosis. When symptoms occur, they can include recurrent respiratory infections, cough, vomiting, or reflux; in rare cases, incarceration may occur. Repair is recommended for all patients, in view of the risk of bowel strangulation, and can be accomplished laparoscopically. Prosthetic material is rarely required. 131.2  Paraesophageal Hernia Shawn K. Ahlfeld Paraesophageal hernia is differentiated from the hiatal hernia in that the gastroesophageal junction is in the normal location. The hernia- tion of the stomach alongside or adjacent to the gastroesophageal junc- tion is prone to incarceration with strangulation and perforation. A previous Nissen fundoplication and other diaphragmatic procedures are risk factors. This unusual diaphragmatic hernia should be repaired promptly after identification. 131.3  Eventration Krishna K. Acharya, Alicia J. Sprecher, and Susan S. Cohen Eventration of the diaphragm is an abnormal elevation consist- ing of a thinned diaphragmatic muscle that causes elevation of the entire hemidiaphragm or more often the anterior aspect of the hemidiaphragm. This elevation produces a paradoxical motion of the affected hemidiaphragm. Most eventrations are asymptomatic and do not require repair. A congenital form is the result of either incomplete development of the muscular portion or central tendon or abnormal development of the phrenic nerves. Congenital even- tration may affect lung development, but it has not been associated with pulmonary hypoplasia. The differential diagnosis includes diaphragmatic paralysis, diaphragmatic hernia, traction injury, and iatrogenic injury after heart surgery. Eventration is also associ- ated with pulmonary sequestration, congenital heart disease, spinal muscular atrophy with respiratory distress, and chromosomal triso- mies. Most eventrations are asymptomatic and do not require repair. The indications for surgery include continued need for mechani- cal ventilation, recurrent infections, and failure to thrive. Large or symptomatic eventrations can be repaired by plication through an abdominal or thoracic approach that is minimally invasive. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Diaphragm defect Diaphragm with patch repair A B Fig. 131.3  A, Intraoperative photo of congenital diaphragmatic her- nia (CDH) before repair. B, Intraoperative photo of patch repair of CDH. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 132  u  Pulmonary Air Leaks  1097 Pulmonary air leaks represent air breaching the alveolus and entering potential cavities within the chest. Asymptomatic pneu- mothorax, usually unilateral, is estimated to occur in 1–2% of all newborn infants; symptomatic pneumothorax and pneumome- diastinum are less common. The incidence of pneumothorax is increased in infants with lung diseases such as meconium aspi- ration and respiratory distress syndrome (RDS); in those who receive assisted ventilation, especially if high-­frequency ventila- tion (HFV) support is necessary; and in infants with pulmonary hypoplasia. ETIOLOGY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY The most common cause of pneumothorax is overdistention resulting in alveolar rupture. Alveolar overdistention can occur with positive pressure ventilation during neonatal resuscitation, or it may occur in association with the “ball-­valve” phenomenon that results from aspiration (classically meconium) and bron- chial/bronchiolar obstruction. Although spontaneous rupture of an underlying pulmonary malformation (e.g., lobar emphysema, congenital lung cyst, pneumatocele) occurs, pneumothorax usu- ally occurs in an otherwise normal lung, and no underlying etiol- ogy is identified. Pneumothorax associated with pulmonary hypoplasia is common, tends to occur during the first few hours after birth, and is caused by reduced alveolar surface area and poorly compliant lungs. It is associ- ated with disorders of decreased amniotic fluid volume (Potter syn- drome, renal agenesis, renal dysplasia, chronic amniotic fluid leak), decreased fetal breathing movement (oligohydramnios, neuromus- cular disease, fetal akinesia syndrome), pulmonary space-­occupying lesions (diaphragmatic hernia, pleural effusion, chylothorax), and tho- racic abnormalities (thoracic dystrophies). Gas from a ruptured alveolus escapes into the interstitial spaces of the lung, where it tracks along small conducting airways and dissects along the peribronchial and perivascular connective tissue sheaths to the hilum of the lung (pulmonary interstitial emphysema, PIE). If the volume of escaped air is great enough, it may collect in the mediastinal space (pneumomediastinum) or rupture into the pleural space (pneu- mothorax), subcutaneous tissue (subcutaneous emphysema), and/or pericardial sac (pneumopericardium). Tension pneumothorax occurs if an accumulation of air within the pleural space is sufficient to elevate intrapleural pressure above atmo- spheric pressure. Unilateral tension pneumothorax results in impaired ventilation not only in the ipsilateral lung but also in the contralateral lung because of a shift in the mediastinum toward the contralateral side. Compression of the vena cava and torsion of the great vessels may interfere with venous return. CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS The physical findings of a clinically asymptomatic pneumothorax are hyperresonance and diminished ipsilateral breath sounds with or without tachypnea. Symptomatic pneumothorax is characterized by respiratory distress, which varies from merely high respiratory rate to severe dyspnea, tachypnea, and cyanosis. Irritability and restlessness or apnea may be the earliest signs. The onset is usually sudden but may be gradual; an infant may rapidly become critically ill. Physical exam findings include chest asymmetry with an increased anteropos- terior diameter, hyperresonance, and diminished or absent breath sounds. The heart is displaced toward the contralateral side, resulting in displacement of the cardiac apex and point of maximal impulse. The diaphragm is displaced downward, as is the liver with right-­sided pneumothorax, and may result in abdominal distention. Because pneumothorax may be bilateral in approximately 10% of patients, symmetry of findings does not rule it out. In tension pneumothorax, signs of shock are typical. Pneumomediastinum can occur with or without a pneumothorax and itself is usually asymptomatic. The degree of respiratory distress depends on the amount of trapped gas; if great, bulging of the mid- thoracic area is observed, the neck veins are distended, and blood pressure is low. The last two findings are a result of tamponade of the systemic and pulmonary veins. Although often asymptomatic, subcu- taneous emphysema in newborn infants is almost pathognomonic of pneumomediastinum. Rarely, air may embolize into the circulation (pulmonary air embolism) and cause cutaneous blanching, air in intra- vascular catheters, an air-­filled heart and vessels on chest radiographs, and death. PIE may precede the development of a pneumothorax or may occur independently and lead to increasing respiratory distress as a result of decreased compliance, hypercapnia, and hypoxemia. Hypoxemia is caused by an increased Pa-­ao2 gradient and intrapulmonary shunting. Progressive enlargement of blebs of gas may result in cystic dilation and respiratory deterioration resembling pneumothorax. In severe cases, PIE precedes the development of bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD). Avoidance of high inspiratory or mean airway pressures may prevent the development of PIE. Pneumopericardium is generally associated with pneumothorax with air moving into the pericardium via areas of weakness in the pericardiac sac or via embryonic connections between the pleura and pericardium. Pneumopericardium may be asymptomatic, requiring only general supportive treatment, but it usually manifests as sudden shock with tachycardia, muffled heart sounds, and poor pulses suggest- ing tamponade. Air pressure within the pericardium can cause cardiac tamponade. Preterm infants whose course is complicated by pulmonary air leaks are at increased risk for mortality, BPD (see Chapter 127), severe intra- cranial hemorrhage, and prolonged NICU stays. DIAGNOSIS Pneumothorax and other air leaks should be suspected in newborn infants who show signs of respiratory distress, are restless or irritable, or have a sudden change in condition. The diagnosis of pneumothorax is established by chest radiography, with the edge of the collapsed lung standing out in relief against the pneumothorax (Fig. 132.1). Pneumo- mediastinum is signified by hyperlucency around the heart border and between the sternum and the heart border and the displacement of the thymus by air, typically referred to as the “spinnaker sail” sign (Fig. 132.2). Transillumination of the thorax is often helpful in the emer- gency diagnosis of pneumothorax; the affected side transmits exces- sive light. In pneumopericardium, chest radiography demonstrates a halo of air around the cardiac silhouette. PIE appears as small cystic Chapter 132 Pulmonary Air Leaks: Pneumothorax, Pneumomediastinum, Pulmonary Interstitial Emphysema, Pneumopericardium Alicia J. Sprecher, Krishna K. Acharya, and Susan S. Cohen Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1098  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant radiolucencies along the interstitium often with hyperexpansion and is typically only seen in premature infants with preexisting lung disease. PREVENTION Early recognition of patients at risk for air leak is essential. Infants with oligohydramnios, extreme prematurity, or congenital pulmonary malformations are at increased risk. Surfactant therapy for RDS (see Chapter 126) reduces the incidence of pneumothorax. Avoidance of high inspiratory or mean airway pressures may prevent the develop- ment of air leaks. TREATMENT Without a continued air leak, small asymptomatic and mildly symp- tomatic pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum, and pneumopericar- dium require only close observation. Conservative management of a pneumothorax is effective even in selected infants requiring ventila- tory support. Frequent small feedings may prevent gastric dilation and minimize crying, which can further compromise ventilation and worsen the pneumothorax. Breathing 100% oxygen in term infants may accelerate the resorption of free pleural air into blood by reduc- ing the nitrogen tension in blood and producing a resultant nitrogen pressure gradient from the trapped gas in the blood; however, this is no longer practiced given the risks of oxygen toxicity. When a pneumothorax is large, expanding, or with severe respi- ratory or circulatory embarrassment, emergency decompression by needle thoracentesis and/or chest tube placement is indicated. Needle thoracentesis is typically accomplished with the use of an angiocath or a 23-­gauge butterfly needle attached to a stopcock and syringe to withdraw air. It can be inserted into the second intercostal space of the anterior chest. After the needle thoracentesis a chest radiograph should be obtained to evaluate and monitor for reaccumulation. Chest tube placement should be undertaken in cases of recur- rent pneumothorax after needle decompression or as a primary intervention in select patients at risk for ongoing air leak (i.e., on high-­pressure invasive ventilation). In studies comparing needle decompression with primary chest tube placement there are no dif- ferences in mortality; however, approximately 30% of patients receiv- ing a needle thoracentesis eventually required chest tube placement. Chest tube placement should occur under sterile conditions when- ever possible and be preceded by appropriate analgesia. Pigtail cath- eters are the preferred type of chest tube in infants because of higher success rates and low complication rates. These catheters are placed using the Seldinger technique by introducing a needle, aspirating free air, and subsequently introducing a guidewire over which a pigtail catheter is advanced. Ideally the chest tube should be introduced into the fourth intercostal space (generally at the level of the nipple) in the anterior axillary line. Following placement, the chest tube should be attached to underwater seal drainage or continuous suction (−5 to −20 cm H2O). Serial chest radiographs should be obtained for all infants with a chest tube in place. Pneumopericardium with clinical symptoms (tamponade) requires prompt evacuation of entrapped air via pericardiocentesis. Peri- cardiocentesis should be performed using sterile technique and analgesia whenever possible. Ideally an echocardiogram should be completed before undertaking the procedure and cardiology or cardiothoracic surgery involvement is encouraged. Continuous cardiopulmonary monitoring is essential during the procedure. A 20–23-­gauge butterfly needle is introduced into the chest to the left of the subxiphoid process at a 30–45-­degree angle pointing toward the right shoulder. The needle is advanced until air returns and the pericardium is subsequently evacuated of air. The provider should stop aspirating once air no longer returns, if there is blood return, or if ectopy is observed. Following the procedure an echocardio- gram should be obtained. Treatment of PIE may include bronchoscopy in patients with evi- dence of mucous plugging, selective intubation and ventilation of the uninvolved bronchus, oxygen, general respiratory care, and use of HFV. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Fig. 132.2  Pneumomediastinum in newborn infant. Anteroposterior view (left) demonstrates compression of the lungs, and lateral view (right) shows bulging of the sternum, each resulting from distention of the mediastinum by trapped air. A B Fig. 132.1  A, Right-­sided tension pneumothorax and widespread right lung pulmonary interstitial emphysema (PIE) in a preterm infant receiving intensive care. B, Resolution of pneumothorax with a chest tube in place; PIE persists. (From Meerstadt PWD, Gyll C. Manual of Neonatal Emergency X-­Ray Interpretation. Philadelphia: Saunders; 1994. p. 73.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 134  u  Digestive System Disorders  1099 Massive pulmonary hemorrhage is a relatively uncommon, but cat- astrophic complication with a high risk of morbidity and mortal- ity. Some degree of pulmonary hemorrhage occurs in about 10% of extremely preterm infants. However, massive pulmonary hem- orrhage is less common and can be fatal. Autopsy demonstrates massive pulmonary hemorrhage in 15% of neonates who die in the first 2 weeks of life. The reported incidence at autopsy varies from 1-­4 per 1,000 live births. Approximately 75% of affected patients weigh <2,500 g at birth. Prophylactic indomethacin in extremely low birthweight (ELBW) infants reduces the incidence of pulmo- nary hemorrhage. Most infants with pulmonary hemorrhage have had symptoms of respiratory distress that are indistinguishable from those of respi- ratory distress syndrome (RDS). The onset may occur at birth or may be delayed several days. Hemorrhagic pulmonary edema is the source of blood in many cases and is associated with significant ductal shunting and high pulmonary blood flow or severe left-­sided heart failure resulting from hypoxia. In severe cases, sudden car- diovascular collapse, poor lung compliance, profound cyanosis, and hypercapnia may be present. Radiographic findings are varied and nonspecific, ranging from minor streaking or patchy infiltrates to massive consolidation. The risk of pulmonary hemorrhage is increased in association with acute pulmonary infection, severe asphyxia, RDS, assisted ventilation, patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), congenital heart dis- ease, erythroblastosis fetalis, hemorrhagic disease of the newborn, thrombocytopenia, inborn errors of ammonia metabolism, and cold injury. Pulmonary hemorrhage is the only severe complication in which the rate is increased with surfactant treatment. Pulmo- nary hemorrhage is seen with all surfactants; the incidence ranges from 1–5% of treated infants and is higher with natural surfactant. Bleeding is predominantly alveolar in approximately 65% of cases and interstitial in the rest. Bleeding into other organs is observed at autopsy of severely ill neonates, suggesting an additional bleed- ing diathesis, such as disseminated intravascular coagulation. In preterm infants, often intraventricular hemorrhage can occur at the same time. Acute pulmonary hemorrhage may rarely occur in previously healthy full-­term infants. The cause is unknown. Pul- monary hemorrhage may manifest as hemoptysis or blood in the nasopharynx or airway with no evidence of upper respiratory or gastrointestinal bleeding. Patients present with acute, severe respi- ratory failure requiring mechanical ventilation. Chest radiographs usually demonstrate bilateral alveolar infiltrates. The condition usu- ally responds to intensive supportive treatment (see Chapter 458). Treatment of pulmonary hemorrhage includes blood replace- ment, suctioning to clear the airway, intratracheal administration of epinephrine, and tamponade with increased mean airway pres- sure (often requiring high-­frequency ventilation [HFV]). Although surfactant treatment has been associated with the development of pulmonary hemorrhage, administration of exogenous surfac- tant after the bleeding has occurred can improve lung compliance, because the presence of intraalveolar blood and protein can inacti- vate surfactant. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Chapter 133 Pulmonary Hemorrhage Alicia J. Sprecher, Krishna K. Acharya, and Susan S. Cohen Signs and symptoms suggestive of gastrointestinal (GI) tract pathol- ogy in the newborn may reflect immaturity, disorders specific to the GI tract, or systemic diseases affecting the GI tract as part of a multisystem disorder (Table 134.1; see Chapter 121). Feeding intolerance in the very low birthweight neonate may be due to immaturity of GI motility but also to anatomic lesions from the esophagus to the anus, as well as systemic, metabolic (galac- tosemia, etc.), or inflammatory processes (sepsis, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis). Recognizing other organ system abnormali- ties and abnormal laboratory findings (anemia, thrombocytopenia, leukocytosis, neutropenia, elevated inflammatory markers, acido- sis, hypoglycemia) may help identify the specific disease. Chapter 134 Digestive System Disorders Robert M. Kliegman Table 134.1     Differential Diagnosis of Gastrointestinal Symptoms SYMPTOM GI DISORDERS SYSTEMIC DISORDERS Emesis Reflux Volvulus Pyloric stenosis Hirschsprung disease Imperforate anus NEC Meconium plug Sepsis Inborn error of metabolism Congenital adrenal hyperplasia Increased intracranial pressure Jaundice Hepatitis Biliary atresia GALD PFIC Alagille syndrome Physiologic Hemolysis HLH Sepsis HSV Inborn error of metabolism Abdominal distention Feeding intolerance GI obstruction Meconium plug Ileus Meconium ileus NEC Pseudoobstruction Inguinal hernia Sepsis Hypokalemia Hydronephrosis Ascites Hypermagnesemia GALD, Gestational alloimmune liver disease; PFIC, progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis; GI, gastrointestinal; NEC, necrotizing enterocolitis; HLH, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis; HSV, herpes simplex virus. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 134  u  Digestive System Disorders  1099 Massive pulmonary hemorrhage is a relatively uncommon, but cat- astrophic complication with a high risk of morbidity and mortal- ity. Some degree of pulmonary hemorrhage occurs in about 10% of extremely preterm infants. However, massive pulmonary hem- orrhage is less common and can be fatal. Autopsy demonstrates massive pulmonary hemorrhage in 15% of neonates who die in the first 2 weeks of life. The reported incidence at autopsy varies from 1-­4 per 1,000 live births. Approximately 75% of affected patients weigh <2,500 g at birth. Prophylactic indomethacin in extremely low birthweight (ELBW) infants reduces the incidence of pulmo- nary hemorrhage. Most infants with pulmonary hemorrhage have had symptoms of respiratory distress that are indistinguishable from those of respi- ratory distress syndrome (RDS). The onset may occur at birth or may be delayed several days. Hemorrhagic pulmonary edema is the source of blood in many cases and is associated with significant ductal shunting and high pulmonary blood flow or severe left-­sided heart failure resulting from hypoxia. In severe cases, sudden car- diovascular collapse, poor lung compliance, profound cyanosis, and hypercapnia may be present. Radiographic findings are varied and nonspecific, ranging from minor streaking or patchy infiltrates to massive consolidation. The risk of pulmonary hemorrhage is increased in association with acute pulmonary infection, severe asphyxia, RDS, assisted ventilation, patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), congenital heart dis- ease, erythroblastosis fetalis, hemorrhagic disease of the newborn, thrombocytopenia, inborn errors of ammonia metabolism, and cold injury. Pulmonary hemorrhage is the only severe complication in which the rate is increased with surfactant treatment. Pulmo- nary hemorrhage is seen with all surfactants; the incidence ranges from 1–5% of treated infants and is higher with natural surfactant. Bleeding is predominantly alveolar in approximately 65% of cases and interstitial in the rest. Bleeding into other organs is observed at autopsy of severely ill neonates, suggesting an additional bleed- ing diathesis, such as disseminated intravascular coagulation. In preterm infants, often intraventricular hemorrhage can occur at the same time. Acute pulmonary hemorrhage may rarely occur in previously healthy full-­term infants. The cause is unknown. Pul- monary hemorrhage may manifest as hemoptysis or blood in the nasopharynx or airway with no evidence of upper respiratory or gastrointestinal bleeding. Patients present with acute, severe respi- ratory failure requiring mechanical ventilation. Chest radiographs usually demonstrate bilateral alveolar infiltrates. The condition usu- ally responds to intensive supportive treatment (see Chapter 458). Treatment of pulmonary hemorrhage includes blood replace- ment, suctioning to clear the airway, intratracheal administration of epinephrine, and tamponade with increased mean airway pres- sure (often requiring high-­frequency ventilation [HFV]). Although surfactant treatment has been associated with the development of pulmonary hemorrhage, administration of exogenous surfac- tant after the bleeding has occurred can improve lung compliance, because the presence of intraalveolar blood and protein can inacti- vate surfactant. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Chapter 133 Pulmonary Hemorrhage Alicia J. Sprecher, Krishna K. Acharya, and Susan S. Cohen Signs and symptoms suggestive of gastrointestinal (GI) tract pathol- ogy in the newborn may reflect immaturity, disorders specific to the GI tract, or systemic diseases affecting the GI tract as part of a multisystem disorder (Table 134.1; see Chapter 121). Feeding intolerance in the very low birthweight neonate may be due to immaturity of GI motility but also to anatomic lesions from the esophagus to the anus, as well as systemic, metabolic (galac- tosemia, etc.), or inflammatory processes (sepsis, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis). Recognizing other organ system abnormali- ties and abnormal laboratory findings (anemia, thrombocytopenia, leukocytosis, neutropenia, elevated inflammatory markers, acido- sis, hypoglycemia) may help identify the specific disease. Chapter 134 Digestive System Disorders Robert M. Kliegman Table 134.1     Differential Diagnosis of Gastrointestinal Symptoms SYMPTOM GI DISORDERS SYSTEMIC DISORDERS Emesis Reflux Volvulus Pyloric stenosis Hirschsprung disease Imperforate anus NEC Meconium plug Sepsis Inborn error of metabolism Congenital adrenal hyperplasia Increased intracranial pressure Jaundice Hepatitis Biliary atresia GALD PFIC Alagille syndrome Physiologic Hemolysis HLH Sepsis HSV Inborn error of metabolism Abdominal distention Feeding intolerance GI obstruction Meconium plug Ileus Meconium ileus NEC Pseudoobstruction Inguinal hernia Sepsis Hypokalemia Hydronephrosis Ascites Hypermagnesemia GALD, Gestational alloimmune liver disease; PFIC, progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis; GI, gastrointestinal; NEC, necrotizing enterocolitis; HLH, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis; HSV, herpes simplex virus. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1100  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant Meconium consists of bile salts, bile acids, and debris shed from the intestinal mucosa in the intrauterine period. More than 90% of full-­ term newborn infants and 80% of very low birthweight (VLBW) infants pass meconium within the first 24 hours. The possibility of intestinal obstruction should be considered in any infant who does not pass meconium by 24-­36 hours. MECONIUM PLUGS Meconium plugs syndrome refers to intestinal obstruction, usu- ally in the distal colon, rectum, and anal canal, caused by meco- nium plugs (Fig. 135.1). Resulting from a disproportionately low amount of water in the intestinal lumen, meconium plugs are a rare cause of intrauterine intestinal obstruction and meconium perito- nitis unrelated to cystic fibrosis (CF). Anorectal plugs may also cause mucosal ulceration from bowel wall erosion and subsequent intestinal perforation. Meconium plugs are associated with small left colon syndrome in infants of diabetic mothers, infants with CF (40%) and Hirschsprung disease (40%), maternal opiate use, and magnesium sulfate therapy for preeclampsia and tocolysis. Up to 30% of patients can have spontaneous resolution. Initial treatment may include administration of a glycerin suppository or rectal irri- gation with isotonic saline. In up to 95% of patients, a Gastrogra- fin enema (meglumine diatrizoate, a hyperosmolar, water-­soluble, radiopaque solution containing 0.1% polysorbate 80 [Tween 80] and 37% organically bound iodine) will be both diagnostic and therapeutic, inducing passage of the plug, presumably because the high osmolarity (1,900 mOsm/L) of the solution draws fluid rapidly into the intestinal lumen and loosens the inspissated material. Such rapid loss of fluid into the bowel may result in acute fluid shifts with dehydration and shock, so it is advisable to dilute the contrast material with an equal amount of water and provide intravenous (IV) fluids, during and for several hours after the procedure, suffi- cient to maintain normal vital signs, urine output, and electrolytes. After removal of a meconium plug, the infant should be observed closely, and consideration given to performing diagnostic testing to identify Hirschsprung disease (congenital aganglionic megacolon; see Chapter 378.4) and CF (see Chapter 454). MECONIUM ILEUS Meconium ileus, or impaction of inspissated meconium in the distal small bowel, accounts for up to 30% of cases of neonatal intestinal obstruction. It is common in patients with CF in whom the lack of fetal pancreatic enzymes inhibits digestive mechanisms, and meco- nium becomes viscid and mucilaginous. Clinically, neonates present with intestinal obstruction with or without perforation. Abdominal distention is prominent, and vomiting, often bilious, becomes persis- tent, although occasionally inspissated meconium stools may be passed shortly after birth. Meconium ileus can present as early as in utero, in which the fetus develops acute intestinal obstruction resulting in volvulus or perforation, peritoneal ascites, meconium peritonitis, and hydrops; if untreated, fetal loss may occur. Meconium ileus is primarily associated with cystic fibrosis trans- membrane regulator (CFTR) pathologic variants F508del, G542X, W1282X, R553X, and G551D. Patients with two copies of the F508del variant have a 25% chance of presenting with meconium ileus. F508del plus any other CF mutation confers 17% risk, and two other CF variants confer a 12% risk of meconium ileus. In addi- tion, non-­CFTR genetic modifier genes influence meconium ileus. In families who already have at least one child with CF complicated by meconium ileus, there is a 39% risk for meconium ileus in sub- sequent children, which is more than the rates expected with auto- somal recessive inheritance. In a twin study, 82% of monozygotic twins showed concordance for meconium ileus, whereas only 22% of dizygotic and 24% of two affected siblings showed concordance. Positive newborn screening for CF should prompt sweat testing when the infant weighs >2 kg and is at least 36 weeks of corrected gestational age. Genetic testing confirms the diagnosis of CF (see Chapter 454). In ∼20% of patients with meconium ileus, there is no evidence of CF; in some of these patients, pathogenic variants in GUCY2C are identified. The differential diagnosis involves other causes of intestinal obstruction, including intestinal pseudoobstruction, and other causes of pancreatic insufficiency (see Chapter 398). Prenatal diagnosis is readily achieved by ultrasound with identification of enlarged bowel loops or a mass with distention of the proximal small bowel. Clinically the diagnosis can be made with a history of CF in Chapter 135 Meconium Ileus, Peritonitis, Intestinal Obstruction, and Gastroschisis Eric C. Eichenwald A B Fig. 135.1  Meconium plug. A, Meconium plug evacuated after a di- agnostic contrast enema demonstrated the distinctive white tip (arrow). B, Image from a contrast enema in a term neonate with vomiting and bowel distension demonstrates the long filling defect characteristic of meconium plug syndrome. The child was relieved of the obstruction after evacuation of the plug, without recurrence of symptoms. (From Hernanz-­Schulman M. Congenital and neonatal disorders. In Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging. 12th ed. Philadelphia: Else- vier; 2013: Fig. 106-­14.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 135  u  Meconium Ileus, Peritonitis, Intestinal Obstruction, and Gastroschisis  1101 a sibling, by palpation of doughy or cordlike masses of intestines through the abdominal wall, and from the radiographic appearance. Plain radiographs reveal small bowel obstruction. Air-­fluid levels may not be apparent because of the thickened meconium. In contrast to the generally evenly distended intestinal loops above an atresia, the loops may vary in width and are not as evenly filled with gas. At points of heaviest meconium concentration, the infil- trated gas may create a bubbly, granular appearance (Figs. 135.2 and 135.3). Treatment for simple meconium ileus is a high-­osmolarity Gas- trografin enema, as described for meconium plugs. If the procedure is unsuccessful or perforation of the bowel wall is suspected, a lapa- rotomy is performed and the ileum opened at the point of largest diameter of the impaction. Approximately 50% of these infants have associated intestinal atresia, stenosis, or volvulus that requires surgery. The inspissated meconium is removed by gentle and patient irriga- tion with warm isotonic sodium chloride or N-­acetylcysteine (Muco- myst) solution through a catheter passed between the impaction and the bowel wall. Some patients will require bowel resection with a tem- porary double-­barrel enterostomy followed by serial irrigations and distal refeeding, or primary anastomosis at the initial operation. Most infants with meconium ileus survive the neonatal period. If meco- nium ileus is associated with CF, the long-­term prognosis depends on the severity of the underlying disease (see Chapter 454). In ∼20% of patients with meconium ileus, there is no evidence of CF; in some of these patients pathogenic variants in GUCY2C are identified. MECONIUM PERITONITIS Perforation of the intestine may occur in utero or shortly after birth. Frequently, the intestinal perforation seals naturally with relatively little meconium leakage into the peritoneal cavity. Perforations occur most often as a complication of meconium ileus in infants with CF but occasionally result from a meconium plug or in utero intestinal obstruction of another cause. Cases at the most severe end of the spectrum may be diagnosed on prenatal ultrasound with fetal ascites, polyhydramnios, bowel dilation, intraabdominal speckled calcifications, and hydrops fetalis (Fig. 135.4). At the other end are cases in which an intestinal perfo- ration may seal spontaneously and patients remain asymptomatic, except when meconium becomes calcified and is later discovered on radiographs. Alternatively, the clinical picture may be domi- nated by signs of intestinal obstruction (as in meconium ileus) with abdominal distention, vomiting, and absence of stools or chemical peritonitis presenting with sepsis. Treatment consists primarily of elimination of the intestinal obstruction and drainage of the peri- toneal cavity with a timely surgical intervention proved to result in high survival rate and favorable outcome even in complicated meconium peritonitis. GASTROSCHISIS Gastroschisis is the herniation of abdominal contents (usually small intestine) through a defect in the anterior abdominal wall lateral to the umbilical cord (Fig. 135.5). The etiology is unknown, but it has been “Microcolon” Distal ileum with pellets of meconium Mid ileum with thick tarlike tenacious meconium Proximal small bowel with more fluid meconium A B Fig. 135.2  Meconium ileus. A, Schematic drawing of uncomplicated meconium ileus. Pellets of inspissated meconium fill the terminal ileum proximal to a microcolon. Several loops of more proximal ileum contain thick, tenacious meconium. B, Enterotomy of proximal bowel and the nature of the thick and tenacious meconium. Note the dilated proximal loops of bowel filled with meconium and the progressively small caliber of the distal bowel leading to the microcolon. (A from Leonidas JC, Berdon WE, et al. Meconium ileus and its complications: a reappraisal of plain film roentgen diagnostic criteria. Am J Roentgenol Radium Ther Nucl Med. 970;108[3]:598–609; B courtesy Dr. Wallace W. Neblett III, Nashville, TN.) A B Fig. 135.3  Uncomplicated meconium ileus. A, Abdominal radiograph in 3-­day-­old infant with abdominal distention and bilious aspirates shows dilation of multiple loops of bowel. No calcifications are seen on the radiograph to suggest complicated meconium ileus. Orogastric tube near the gastroesophageal junction was subsequently advanced. B, Contrast enema demonstrates a microcolon, with multiple meco- nium plugs, consistent with the diagnosis of meconium ileus. (From Hernanz-­Schulman M. Congenital and neonatal disorders. In Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging. 13th ed. Philadelphia: Else- vier; 2019: Fig. 102-­36) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1102  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant associated with young maternal age and possible opioid use; the inci- dence is ∼2-­5 infants in 10,000 births. Gastroschisis is usually an isolated anomaly but has a high morbidity and mortality especially in complex lesions associated with intestinal atresias and necrosis resulting in short bowel syndrome and intesti- nal failure (see Chapter 385.6). Treatment requires resection of atretic or necrotic tissue and long-­term parenteral alimentation until enteral nutrition can be established. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. A B C E D Fig. 135.4  Complicated meconium ileus. A, Abdominal radiograph in 2-­day-­old girl with abdominal distention and bilious aspirates shows absence of bowel gas in the right abdomen with a partly calcified mass displacing gas-­filled dilated loops of bowel to the left. B, Ultrasound image demon- strates the subhepatic, partly calcified mass with internal debris and fluid-­fluid level (arrowhead). C, Additional ultrasound image shows a portion of the cyst wall (arrows) and multiple, abnormal, hyperechoic loops of bowel. D, Abdominal radiograph in different 1-­day-­old infant shows a calcified mass in right upper quadrant, shown at sonography to represent a loculated complex meconium collection. E, Radiograph a few hours later of the same infant shown in D shows a persistent perforation with gas entering into the right upper quadrant collection (arrows). (From Hernanz-­Schulman M. Congenital and neonatal disorders. In Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging. 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Fig. 102-­37) Fig. 135.5  Intraoperative view of a complex gastroschisis with intesti- nal atresia. Note the severe bowel matting in the complex gastroschisis. (Modified from Vinit N, Talbotec C, De Tristan MA, et  al. Predicting factors of protracted intestinal failure in children with gastroschisis. J Pediatr. 2022;243:122–129. Fig. 1B.) Necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) is the most common life-­threatening emergency of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract in the newborn period. The disease is characterized by various degrees of mucosal or transmural necrosis of the intestine followed by local and systemic inflammation. The cause of NEC remains unclear but is most likely multifactorial. DEFINITION NEC is clinically identified using a combination of clinical and radio- graphic signs and staged by categorizing NEC into suspected (stage I), definite (stage II, clinical signs of abdominal pathology with an abnor- mal abdominal radiograph showing pneumatosis intestinalis, portal venous gas, or ileus), and advanced (stage III, signs of stage II plus severe systemic signs of inflammation and acidosis with or without signs of intestinal perforation). In addition, NEC is also categorized into medical and surgical NEC defined by the type of acute interven- tion required. These criteria have been criticized for categorizing con- ditions with heterogeneous origins as the same disease. For example, conditions such as spontaneous intestinal perforation, septic ileus, and allergic enterocolitis can present with signs similar to NEC, but they arise from differing pathogenesis and may have differing outcomes. Similarly, term infants often present with NEC attributable to coex- isting conditions such as congenital heart disease or gastroschisis, and likely do not share identical pathogenesis with NEC occurring in preterm infants. To minimize the heterogeneity of presentations that get diagnosed as NEC, a definition of “preterm NEC” has been pro- posed for use in clinical research. Preterm NEC in clinical research is defined by the presence of (1) clinical sign of abdominal distention and/or hematochezia; (2) onset between 10 days after birth to 36 weeks’ postmenstrual age with the highest risk period being 30-­32 weeks’ Chapter 136 Necrotizing Enterocolitis Sagori Mukhopadhyay and Misty Good Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 136  u  Necrotizing Enterocolitis  1103 Blood and other microbiological cultures Molecular diagnostics for virus detection Abdominal X-ray Ultrasound Markers of inflammation Markers of gut injury Decompression Hold feeds Preventative measure — use of human milk Hypoxia/Ischemia Microbial injury Prematurity Genetics Mechanical and mucosal injury Encourage research to determine mechanisms of injury and beneficial interventions Genetic variants in Toll-like receptor-4, IL-4 receptor α-chain, IL-16 Provide hemodynamic support Improve oxygen delivery Treat acidosis Minimize metabolic demand Treat anemia and coagulation abnormalities Initiate broad-spectrum antibiotic coverage Preventative measures — probiotics and restricting unnecessary antibiotic use Blood gas/lactate Electrolytes, creatinine Hematological profile Fig. 136.1  Overview of risk factors and mechanisms of injury in necrotizing enterocolitis–associated presentation and management approaches. Bold indicates interventions that are common first-­line interventions for NEC. IL, Interleukin. (Figure created by authors using BioRender.com.) postmenstrual age; and (3) one of the following—pneumatosis intesti- nalis or portal venous gas by radiograph or ultrasound, histopathologic evidence of intestinal necrosis, or evidence of vasculitis, coagulopathy, or inflammation in the absence of infection. EPIDEMIOLOGY Epidemiologic studies have reported changes in NEC incidence in the past decade. Among 473,895 very low birthweight infants (VLBW, birthweight <1,500 g) admitted to one of 820 centers in the United States (2006-2017), the overall rate of NEC was 7.6%. From 2006–2017, there was a significant reduction in the prevalence of medical but not surgical NEC; mortality with NEC also decreased from 20.7% to16.8% among infants with medical NEC, and 36.6% to 31.6% for neonates with surgical NEC. PATHOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS Many factors contribute to the development of the pathologic find- ings of NEC, including mucosal ischemia and subsequent necrosis; gas accumulation in the submucosa of the bowel wall (pneumatosis intes- tinalis); and progression of the necrosis to perforation, peritonitis, sepsis, and death. An overview of common hypothesized pathogenic mechanisms, related clinical presentation, and management is shown in Figure 136.1. The distal part of the ileum and the proximal segment of the colon are involved most frequently; in fatal cases, transmural necrosis may extend from the stomach to the rectum (NEC totalis). The pathogenesis of NEC is not fully understood, but three major risk factors have been implicated: prematurity, bacterial colonization of the gut, and enteral feeding. NEC develops primarily in prema- ture infants with exposure to a nutritional substrate in the context of immature intestinal motility, and immunity, microbial dysbiosis, and mucosal ischemia. An underlying genetic predisposition is recognized with variants in genes regulating immunomodulation and inflamma- tion (e.g., toll-­like receptor-­4, interleukin [IL]-­4 receptor α chain, IL-­ 6), apoptosis and cellular repair (e.g., platelet-­activating factor), and oxidant stress (e.g., vascular endothelial growth factor, arginine, nitric oxide). The greatest risk factor for NEC is prematurity, with a mean onset between 30 and 32 weeks’ postmenstrual age. Other risk factors include small for gestational age, polycythemia, and conditions resulting in in utero hypoxia. NEC rarely occurs before the initiation of enteral feed- ing and is much less common in infants fed human milk. CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS Infants with NEC have a variety of signs and symptoms and may have an insidious or sudden catastrophic onset (Table 136.1). Age of onset is inversely related to gestational age. The first signs of impending disease may be nonspecific, including lethargy and temperature instability, or related to GI pathology, such as abdominal tenderness and distention, feeding intolerance, and bloody stools. Because of nonspecific signs, sepsis may be suspected before NEC. The spectrum of illness is broad, ranging from mild disease with only guaiac-­positive stools to severe illness with bowel perforation, peritonitis, systemic inflammatory response syndrome, shock, and death. Laboratory findings may include neutropenia, anemia, thrombocytopenia, coagulopathy, and metabolic acidosis. Hypotension and respiratory failure are common. Progression may be rapid, but it is unusual for the disease to progress from mild to severe after 72 hours. DIAGNOSIS A very high index of suspicion in treating preterm at-­risk infants is crucial. Plain abdominal radiographs are essential to make a diagnosis of NEC. The finding of pneumatosis intestinalis confirms the clinical suspicion of NEC and is diagnostic; 50–75% of patients have pneumatosis when treat- ment is started (Fig. 136.2). Portal venous gas is a sign of severe disease, and pneumoperitoneum indicates a perforation (Figs. 136.3 and 136.4). Ultrasound may be useful to evaluate for free fluid, abscess, pneumato- sis intestinalis, and bowel wall thickness, peristalsis, and perfusion (Fig. 136.5). Doppler flowmetry studies can be used to assess flow in superior mesenteric artery and portal vein. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1104  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant Fig. 136.4  Necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC). Plain abdominal x-­ray film of an infant with perforated NEC showing pneumoperitoneum. (From Tam PKH, Chung PHY, St Peter SD, et al. Advances in paediatric gastro- enterology. Lancet. 2017;390:1072–1082. Fig. 4) Fig. 136.2  Necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC). Kidney-­ureter-­bladder film demonstrates abdominal distention, hepatic portal venous gas (ar- row), and a bubbly appearance of pneumatosis intestinalis (arrowhead; right lower quadrant). The latter two signs are thought to be pathogno- monic for neonatal NEC. Fig. 136.3  Intestinal perforation. Cross-­table abdominal radiograph in patient with neonatal necrotizing enterocolitis demonstrates marked distention and massive pneumoperitoneum, as evidenced by the free air below the anterior abdominal wall. Table 136.1     Signs and Symptoms Associated with Necrotizing Enterocolitis GASTROINTESTINAL Abdominal distention Abdominal tenderness Feeding intolerance Delayed gastric emptying Emesis Occult/gross blood in stool Change in stool pattern/diarrhea Abdominal mass Erythema of abdominal wall SYSTEMIC Lethargy Apnea/respiratory distress Temperature instability Acidosis (metabolic and/or respiratory) Glucose instability Poor perfusion/shock Thrombocytopenia Disseminated intravascular coagulopathy From Kanto WP Jr, Hunter JE, Stoll BJ. Recognition and medical management of necrotizing enterocolitis. Clin Perinatol. 1994;21:335–346. The differential diagnosis of NEC includes septic ileus, GI obstruc- tion, volvulus, and isolated intestinal perforation. Idiopathic focal intestinal perforation can occur spontaneously or can be associated with the early use of postnatal corticosteroids and indomethacin. Pneumoperitoneum develops in such patients, but they are usually less ill than those with NEC. Occasional clusters of NEC cases have been attributed to viral infections, specifically norovirus, enterovirus, and rotavirus. Stool viral testing and infectious disease consultation should be considered when multiple cases occur together. TREATMENT Rapid initiation of therapy is required for infants with suspected, as well as proven NEC. There is no specific treatment for established NEC, so therapy is directed at providing supportive care and pre- venting further injury with cessation of feeding, nasogastric decom- pression, and administration of intravenous fluids and antibiotics (see Fig. 136.1). Careful attention to the respiratory status, coagula- tion profile, and acid-­base and electrolyte balances are important. Ventilation should be assisted in the presence of apnea or if abdom- inal distention is contributing to hypoxia and hypercapnia. Intra- vascular volume replacement with crystalloid or blood products, cardiovascular support with fluid boluses and/or inotropes, and correction of hematologic, metabolic, and electrolyte abnormali- ties are essential to stabilize the infant with NEC. Umbilical arterial catheters are reported to reduce blood flow in the mesenteric blood vessels and should be removed if they remain in place after a diag- nosis of NEC. Maintaining reliable intravenous access for ongoing hemodynamic support and medication administration is critical. Approximately 16% of definite NEC cases may be associated with bacteremia detected within 72 hours of its diagnosis, most frequently with a gram-­negative organism. NEC with associated bacteremia has a higher risk for requiring surgical intervention and mortality. Once blood has been drawn for culture, systemic antibiotics (with broad coverage based on the antibiotic sensitivity patterns in the particular neonatal ICU) should be started immediately. The addition of anaero- bic coverage with antibiotics such as metronidazole or clindamycin is variably practiced. Management of NEC with anaerobic coverage is Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 136  u  Necrotizing Enterocolitis  1105 associated with slightly lower risk of mortality and higher risk of sub- sequent strictures. The patient’s course should be monitored closely by means of frequent physical assessments in the NICU; sequential anteroposterior and cross-­ table lateral or lateral decubitus abdominal radiographs to detect intes- tinal perforation; and serial determinations of hematologic, electrolyte, and acid-­base status. A surgeon should be consulted early in the course of treatment. The only absolute indication for surgery is evidence of perfora- tion on an abdominal radiograph (pneumoperitoneum). However, this is present in less than half of infants with perforation or necrosis at operative exploration. Progressive clinical deterioration despite maximum medical management, a single fixed bowel loop on serial radiographs, and abdomi- nal wall erythema are relative indications for exploratory laparotomy. Ide- ally, surgery should be performed after intestinal necrosis develops but before perforation and peritonitis occur. The optimal surgical approach, however, remains controversial. The options for surgical treatment include primary peritoneal drainage (PPD) or exploratory laparotomy with resec- tion of the necrotic intestine and usually stoma creation. Laparotomy is usually the initial therapy in the majority of VLBW infants with surgical NEC, even in those <1,000 g. Randomized clinical trials comparing these approaches failed to demonstrate significant differences in survival, nutri- tional outcomes, or length of stay. However, among those with a diagnosis of NEC (as opposed to intestinal perforation), 69% died or had neurode- velopmental impairment (NDI) when managed with initial laparotomy versus 85% when managed with PPD. In contrast, among infants with a diagnosis of intestinal perforation, death or NDI occurred 69% and 63% after initial management with laparotomy or PPD, respectively. When the diagnosis is confirmed NEC, initial management with laparotomy is more likely to reduce risk of death or NDI compared to PPD. However, the ultimate surgical approach for an individual case also depends on the surgeon’s assessment and physiologic status of the patient. PROGNOSIS In patients with pneumatosis intestinalis at NEC diagnosis, dis- ease progression is nonresponsive to medical management alone in approximately 20–40%; of these that require surgery, 20–50% die. Early postoperative complications include wound infection, dehis- cence, and stomal problems (prolapse, necrosis). Later complica- tions include intestinal strictures, which occur in approximately 25–35% of surgically or medically managed patients. After massive intestinal resection, complications from postoperative NEC include short bowel syndrome (malabsorption, growth failure, malnutri- tion), complications related to central venous catheters (sepsis, thrombosis), and cholestatic jaundice. Preterm infants with NEC who require surgical intervention are at increased risk for adverse growth and neurodevelopmental outcomes. PREVENTION The most effective preventive strategy for NEC is the use of human milk (maternal or donor); newborns exclusively fed breast milk have a reduced risk of NEC. However, because human milk does not provide complete nutritional support for very preterm infants, nutritional fortification is usual practice. Some studies have sug- gested that an “exclusive human milk diet” using human rather than bovine fortifiers may further reduce the risk of NEC. An optimal feeding protocol (rapid vs slow volume increments) has not been discovered; it is important to note that strict adherence to a NICU-­ specific feeding protocol reduces the risk of NEC. Additionally, while extensive data and meta-­analyses would support the use of probiotics to prevent NEC, there is no clear consensus on the safest, most effective formulation, timing of administration, or length of therapy. Other preventive strategies using prebiotics and synbiotics have also been studied, with variable outcomes. Inhibitors of gastric acid secretion (H2-­receptor blockers, proton pump inhibitors), high osmolality enteral fluids, or prolonged empirical antibiotics in the early neonatal period have been associated with increased risk of NEC and should be avoided. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Fig. 136.5  Necrotizing enterocolitis. A, Mu- cosal and submucosal thickening (arrows). B, Intramural gas (pneumatosis intestinalis) creates an echogenic ring (arrows). C, Widespread echo- genic bubbles of gas in the portal veins (arrows). D, Fluid with echogenic debris (F) lies adjacent to thick loops. (From John SD, Hollingsworth C: The pediatric gastrointestinal tract. In Levine D, Rumack CM, Wilson SR, Charboneau JW, eds. Diagnostic Ultrasound, 4th ed. Philadelphia: El- sevier, 2014. Fig 55.29.) A C B D F Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1106  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant Hyperbilirubinemia is a common and, in most cases, benign prob- lem in neonates. Jaundice is observed during the first week after birth in approximately 60% of term infants and 80% of preterm infants. The yellow color usually results from the accumulation of unconjugated, nonpolar, lipid-­soluble bilirubin pigment in the skin. This unconju- gated bilirubin (designated indirect-­acting by nature of the van den Bergh reaction) is an end product of heme-­protein catabolism from a series of enzymatic reactions by heme-­oxygenase and biliverdin reduc- tase and nonenzymatic reducing agents in the reticuloendothelial cells. It may also be partly caused by deposition of pigment from conjugated bilirubin, the end product from indirect, unconjugated bilirubin that has undergone conjugation in the liver cell microsome by the enzyme uridine diphosphoglucuronic acid (UDP)–glucuronyl transferase to form the polar, water-­soluble glucuronide of bilirubin (direct-­reacting). Although bilirubin may have a physiologic role as an antioxidant, eleva- tions of indirect, unconjugated bilirubin are potentially neurotoxic. Even though the conjugated form is not neurotoxic, direct hyperbilirubinemia indicates potentially serious hepatic disorders or a systemic illness. ETIOLOGY During the neonatal period, metabolism of bilirubin is in transition from the fetal stage, during which the placenta is the principal route of elimination of the lipid-­soluble, unconjugated bilirubin, to the adult stage, during which the water-­soluble conjugated form is excreted from hepatic cells into the biliary system and gastrointestinal tract. Unconju- gated hyperbilirubinemia may be caused or increased by any factor that (1) increases the load of bilirubin to be metabolized by the liver (hemo- lytic anemias, polycythemia, bruising or internal hemorrhage, short- ened RBC life as a result of immaturity or transfusion of cells, increased enterohepatic circulation, infection), (2) damages or reduces the activity of the transferase enzyme or other related enzymes (genetic deficiency, hypoxia, infection, thyroid deficiency), (3) competes for or blocks the transferase enzyme (drugs and other substances requiring glucuronic acid conjugation), or (4) leads to an absence or decreased amounts of the enzyme or to reduction of bilirubin uptake by liver cells (genetic defect, prematurity). Gene polymorphisms in the hepatic uridine diphosphate glucuronosyltransferase isoenzyme 1A1 (UGT1A1) and the solute car- rier organic anion transporter 1B1 (SLCO1B1), alone or in combination, influence the incidence of neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. The toxic effects of elevated serum concentrations of unconjugated bilirubin are increased by factors that reduce the retention of bilirubin in the circulation (hypoproteinemia, displacement of bilirubin from its binding sites on albumin by competitive binding of drugs such as sulfisoxazole and moxalactam, acidosis, and increased free fatty acid concentration secondary to hypoglycemia, starvation, or hypother- mia). Neurotoxic effects are directly related not only to the perme- ability of the blood-­brain barrier (BBB) and nerve cell membranes but also to neuronal susceptibility to injury, all of which are adversely influenced by asphyxia, prematurity, hyperosmolality, and infection. Early and frequent feeding decreases, whereas suboptimal feedings and dehydration increases serum levels of bilirubin. Delay in passage of meconium, which contains 1 mg bilirubin/dL, may contribute to jaun- dice by enterohepatic recirculation after deconjugation by intestinal glucuronidase (Fig. 137.1). Drugs such as oxytocin (in the mother) and chemicals used in the nursery such as phenolic detergents may also produce unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia. CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS Jaundice usually appears during the early neonatal period, depend- ing on etiology. Whereas jaundice from deposition of indirect biliru- bin in the skin tends to appear bright yellow or orange, jaundice of the obstructive type (direct bilirubin) has a greenish or muddy yellow cast. Jaundice usually becomes apparent in a cephalocaudal progres- sion, starting on the face and progressing to the abdomen and then the feet, as serum levels increase. Dermal pressure may reveal the anatomic progression of jaundice (face, approximately 5 mg/dL; mid-­abdomen, 15 mg/dL; soles, 20 mg/dL), but clinical examination cannot reliably estimate serum levels. Noninvasive techniques for transcutaneous mea- surement of bilirubin that correlate with serum levels may be used to screen infants, but determination of the serum bilirubin level is indi- cated in patients with elevated age-­specific transcutaneous bilirubin measurement, progressing jaundice, or risk for hemolysis or sepsis. Infants with severe hyperbilirubinemia may present with lethargy and poor feeding and, without treatment, can progress to acute bilirubin encephalopathy (kernicterus) (see Chapter 137.1). DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS The distinction between physiologic and pathologic jaundice relates to the timing, rate of rise, and extent of hyperbilirubinemia, because some of the same causes of physiologic jaundice (e.g., large RBC mass, decreased capacity for bilirubin conjugation, increased enterohepatic circulation) can also result in pathologic jaundice. Evaluation should be determined on risk factors, clinical appearance, and severity of the hyperbilirubi- nemia (Tables 137.1-­137.3). Jaundice that is present at birth or appears within the first 24 hours after birth should be considered pathologic and requires immediate attention. Potential diagnoses would include erythroblastosis fetalis, concealed hemorrhage, sepsis, or congenital Chapter 137 Jaundice and ­Hyperbilirubinemia in the Newborn Kelsey S. Ryan and Robert M. Kliegman Intestinal lumen Meconium Bilirubin MG Bilirubin DG Circulating unconjugated bilirubin Unconjugated bilirubin BMG        BDG Urobilinoids Tissue glucuronidase Unconjugated bilirubin Recirculated unconjugated bilirubin X Fig. 137.1  Metabolism of bilirubin in the neonatal period. Neonatal production rate of bilirubin is 6-­8 mg/kg/24 hr (in contrast to 3-­4 mg/ kg/24 hr in adults). Water-­insoluble bilirubin is bound to albumin. At the plasma-­hepatocyte interface, a liver membrane carrier (bilitranslo- case) transports bilirubin to a cytosolic binding protein (ligandin or Y protein, now known to be glutathione S-­transferase), which prevents back-­absorption to plasma. Bilirubin is converted to bilirubin monoglu- curonide (BMG). Neonates excrete more BMG than adults. In the fe- tus, conjugated lipid-­insoluble BMG and bilirubin diglucuronide (BDG) must be deconjugated by tissue β-­glucuronidases to facilitate placental transfer of lipid-­soluble unconjugated bilirubin across the placental li- pid membranes. After birth, intestinal or milk-­containing glucuronidas- es contribute to the enterohepatic recirculation of bilirubin and possibly to the development of hyperbilirubinemia. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 137  u  Jaundice and ­Hyperbilirubinemia in the Newborn  1107 infections, including syphilis, cytomegalovirus (CMV), rubella, and toxoplasmosis. Significant hemolysis is suggested by a rapid rise in serum bilirubin concentration (>0.5 mg/dL/hr), anemia, pallor, reticulo- cytosis, hepatosplenomegaly, and a positive family history. An unusually high proportion of direct-­reacting bilirubin may characterize jaundice in infants who have received intrauterine transfusions for erythroblastosis fetalis. Jaundice that first appears on the second or third day is usually physiologic but may represent a more severe form. Familial nonhemo- lytic icterus (Crigler-­Najjar syndrome) and early-­onset breastfeeding (suboptimal intake) jaundice are seen initially on the second or third day. Jaundice appearing after the third day and within the first week suggests bacterial sepsis or urinary tract infection; it may also be caused by other infections, notably syphilis, toxoplasmosis, CMV, herpes simplex virus (HSV), and enterovirus. Jaundice secondary to extensive ecchymosis or blood extravasation may occur during the first day or later, especially in premature infants. Polycythemia may also lead to early jaundice. There is a long differential diagnosis for jaundice first recognized after the first week of life, including breast milk jaundice, septicemia, congenital atresia or paucity of the bile ducts, hepatitis, galactosemia, hypothyroidism, cystic fibrosis (CF), pyloric stenosis, and congenital hemolytic anemia crises related to RBC morphology and enzyme defi- ciencies (Fig. 137.2). The differential diagnosis for persistent jaundice during the first month of life includes hyperalimentation-­associated cholestasis, hepatitis, CMV, syphilis, toxoplasmosis, familial nonhe- molytic icterus, biliary atresia, galactosemia and other inborn errors of metabolism, and inspissated bile syndrome following hemolytic dis- ease of the newborn. Rarely, physiologic jaundice may be prolonged for several weeks, as in infants with hypothyroidism or pyloric stenosis. Regardless of gestation or time of appearance of jaundice, patients with significant hyperbilirubinemia and those with symptoms or signs require a complete diagnostic evaluation, which includes review of risks (Table 137.1), determination of direct and indirect bilirubin frac- tions, hemoglobin, reticulocyte count, blood type, direct antiglobulin/ antibody test (DAT) (Coombs test), and examination of a peripheral blood smear. Indirect hyperbilirubinemia, reticulocytosis, and a smear with evidence of RBC destruction suggest hemolysis (see Table 137.2). In the absence of blood group incompatibility, non–immunologically-­ induced hemolysis should be considered. If the reticulocyte count, Coombs test result, and direct bilirubin value are normal, physiologic or pathologic indirect hyperbilirubinemia may be present (see Fig. 137.2). If direct hyperbilirubinemia is present, diagnostic possibilities include hepatitis, congenital bile duct disorders (biliary atresia, paucity of bile ducts, Byler disease), cholestasis, inborn errors of metabolism, CF, congenital hemosiderosis, sepsis, and neonatal hepatic failure syn- dromes (Table 137.4). Table 137.1     Risk Factors for Severe Neonatal Hyperbilirubinemia GENETIC FACTORS • Gilbert syndrome • Crigler-­Najjar syndrome • Alagille syndrome • β thalassemia • Glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency • Bilirubin glucuronosyltransferase polymorphism • Pyruvate kinase deficiency • Erythrocyte structural defects (including hereditary spherocytosis and elliptocytosis) • Galactosemia MATERNAL FACTORS • Family history of severe jaundice, splenectomy, or cholecystectomy • Primiparity • Teenage pregnancy • Diabetes • Rhesus incompatibility • ABO incompatibility • Other blood group isoimmunization • Use of drugs during labor (including oxytocin, promethazine, and bupivacaine) • Exclusive breastfeeding PERINATAL FACTORS • Mode of deliver (breech vs vertex, instrumentation) • Birth trauma (cephalohematoma or substantial bruising, extravasation) • Birth asphyxia • Congenital infections (including cytomegalovirus and syphilis) • Sepsis NEONATAL FACTORS • Male sex • Prematurity or low birthweight and small-­for-­gestational age • Hypothyroidism • Polycythemia • Hypoglycemia • Low intake of breast milk, dehydration, or weight loss • Breast milk jaundice • Jaundice in the first day of life • Trisomy 21 • Infant of diabetic mother • Cephalohematoma, other bruising OTHER RISK FACTORS AND MARKERS • Previous sibling received phototherapy or exchange transfusion • Predischarge total serum bilirubin or transcutaneous bilirubin concentration in the high zone • Use of hemolytic agents (e.g., naphthalene or menthol-­based products) in glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase deficient population groups • Folate deficiency • Aflatoxins • Hypothermia • Birth outside of a healthcare facility Modified from Olusanya BO, Kaplan M, Hansen TWR. Neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia: a global perspective. Lancet Child Adolesc. 2018;2:610–618. Panel 2, p. 612. Table 137.2     Evaluation of the Neonate with Significant Jaundice CONCERN POSSIBLE DIAGNOSIS INITIAL LABORATORY TESTS Jaundice on day 1 Hemolysis* TORCH/sepsis Hepatic failure syndromes† Internal hemorrhage CBC, smear Total and direct bilirubin Blood type and Coombs test Jaundice requiring phototherapy Hemolysis* TORCH/sepsis As above Direct/ conjugated hyperbilirubinemia TORCH/sepsis Biliary atresia Other causes of cholestasis‡ Hepatic failure syndromes† Hepatic enzymes, INR, check newborn screen for metabolic disease, blood glucose, blood ammonia and lactate, urine and blood cultures, CMV and HSV PCR *Hemolysis may be immune or nonimmune (RBC membrane or enzyme defects). †Hepatic failure syndromes: HSV, CMV, gestational alloimmune liver disease, mitochondrial liver disease, familial hemophagocytic syndrome. ‡See Chapter 404. CMV, Cytomegalovirus; CBC, complete blood count; HSV, herpes simplex virus; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; INR, international normalized ratio; TORCH, toxoplasmosis, other, rubella, CMV, herpes. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1108  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant Table 137.3     Diagnostic Features of the Various Types of Neonatal Jaundice DIAGNOSIS VAN DEN BERGH REACTION JAUNDICE PEAK BILIRUBIN CONCENTRATION BILIRUBIN RATE OF ACCUMULATION (mg/dL/day) COMMENTS APPEARS DISAPPEARS MG/DL AGE IN DAYS “Physiologic jaundice” Usually relates to degree of maturity Full-­term Indirect 2-­3 days 4-­5 days 10-­12 2-­3 <5 Premature Indirect 3-­4 days 7-­9 days 15 6-­8 <5 Hyperbilirubinemia caused by metabolic factors Metabolic factors: hypoxia, respiratory distress, lack of carbohydrate Full-­term Indirect 2-­3 days Variable >12 First wk <5 Hormonal influences: hypothyroidism, hormones, Gilbert syndrome Premature Indirect 3-­4 days Variable >15 First wk <5 Genetic factors: Crigler-­ Najjar syndrome, Gilbert syndrome Hemolytic states and hematoma Indirect May appear in first 24 hr Variable Unlimited Variable Usually >5 Erythroblastosis: Rh, ABO, Kell congenital hemolytic states: spherocytic, nonspherocytic Infantile pyknocytosis Drug: vitamin K Enclosed hemorrhage— hematoma Mixed hemolytic and hepatoxic factors Indirect and direct May appear in first 24 hr Variable Unlimited Variable Usually >5 Infection: bacterial sepsis, pyelonephritis, hepatitis, toxoplasmosis CMV HSV Rubella, syphilis Hepatocellular damage Indirect and direct Usually 2-­3 days; may appear by second wk Variable Unlimited Variable Variable, can be >5 Biliary atresia; paucity of bile ducts, familial cholestasis, galactosemia; hepatitis, infection, hepatic failure syndromes* *Gestational alloimmune liver disease, hemophagocytic lymphocytosis, mitochondrial hepatic disorders, inborn errors of metabolism CMV, Cytomegalovirus; HSV, herpes simplex virus. From Brown AK. Neonatal jaundice. Pediatr Clin North Am. 1962;9:575–603. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 137  u  Jaundice and ­Hyperbilirubinemia in the Newborn  1109 Sepsis Intrauterine infection Toxoplasmosis Cytomegalovirus Rubella Herpes simplex Syphilis Enterovirus Paucity of bile ducts Disorders of bile acid metabolism Severe hemolytic disease Biliary atresia Giant cell hepatitis Choledochal cyst Cystic fibrosis Galactosemia, other IEM Alpha1-antitrypsin deficiency Tyrosinemia Hyperalimentation cholestasis GALD HLH Citrin deficiency Positive Coombs test Isoimmunization Rh ABO Other blood group Increased indirect bilirubin Negative Coombs test Hemoglobin Normal or low High (polycythemia) Reticulocyte count Increased Red cell morphology Twin transfusion Maternal–fetal transfusion Delayed cord clamping Small for gestational age infant Trisomy 21 Characteristic Spherocytosis Elliptocytosis Stomatocytosis Pyknocytosis Fragmented cells Nonspecific G6PD deficiency PK deficiency Other enzyme deficiency Disseminated intravascular coagulation Normal Enclosed hemorrhage Increased enterohepatic circulation, delayed or infrequent stooling, bowel obstruction Inadequate caloric intake Neonatal asphyxia Prolonged hyperbilirubinemia Gilbert syndrome Down syndrome Hypothyroidism Breast-feeding Crigler-Najjar syndrome Increased direct bilirubin Fig. 137.2  Algorithmic approach to the diagnosis of neonatal jaundice. G6PD, Glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase; GALD, gestational alloim- mune liver disease; HLH, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis; IDM, infants of diabetic mothers; IEM, inborn error of metabolism; PK, pyruvate kinase. (From Oski FA. Differential diagnosis of jaundice. In Taeusch HW, Ballard RA, Avery MA, eds. Schaffer and Avery’s Diseases of the Newborn. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 1991.) Table 137.4     Typical Laboratory Findings in Neonatal Liver Failure GALD HLH MITOCHONDRIAL VIRAL ISCHEMIC Transaminase levels (IU/L) Normal/mild increase <100 Moderate/significant increase (>1,000) Moderate increase (100-­500) Significant increase (>1,000) Significant increase (>1,000-­6,000) INR Significant increase Moderate/significant increase Moderate/significant increase Moderate/significant increase Moderate/significant increase Ferritin level (ng/mL) 800-­7,000 Significant increase (>20,000) Variable Significant increase (>20,000) Variable depending on underlying cause of ischemia Triglyceride levels Normal Increased Normal Normal Normal Hypoglycemia Yes Often Yes Often Variable Lactic acidosis Normal Normal Increased Normal Often α-­Fetoprotein level (for age) Increased Normal Normal/increased Normal Normal Cholestasis Progressive after birth Moderate/significant Moderate None/mild at ­presentation Mild/moderate HLH, Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis; GALD, gestational alloimmune liver disease; INR, international normalized ratio. From Larson-­Nath C, Vitola BE. Neonatal acute liver failure. Clin Perinatol. 2020;47:25–39. Table 2 with data from Sundaram SS, Alonso EM, Narkewicz, MR, et al. J Pediatr 2011;159:813–818; Taylor SA, Whitington, PF. Liver Transpl. 2016;22(5):677–685; Bitar R, Thwaites R, Davison S, et al. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2017;64(1):70–75; Fellman V, Kotarsky H. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med. 2011;16(4):222–228. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1110  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant PHYSIOLOGIC JAUNDICE (ICTERUS NEONATORUM) Under normal circumstances, the level of indirect bilirubin in umbili- cal cord serum is 1-­3 mg/dL and rises at a rate of <5 mg/dL/24 hr; thus jaundice becomes visible on the second or third day, usually peaking between the second and fourth days at 5-­6 mg/dL and decreasing to <2 mg/dL between the fifth and seventh days after birth. Jaundice asso- ciated with these changes is designated physiologic and is believed to be the result of increased bilirubin production from the breakdown of fetal RBCs combined with transient limitation in the conjugation of bilirubin by the immature neonatal liver. Overall, 6–7% of full-­term infants have indirect bilirubin levels >13 mg/dL, and <3% have levels >15 mg/dL. Risk factors for elevated indirect bilirubin include maternal age, ethnicity (Chinese, Japanese, Korean, Native American), maternal diabetes, prematurity, drugs, altitude, polycythemia, male, trisomy 21, cutaneous bruising, blood extravasation (cephalohematoma), oxytocin induction, breastfeed- ing, weight loss (dehydration or caloric deprivation), delayed bowel movement, and a family history of, or a sibling who had, physiologic jaundice (see Table 137.1). In infants without these variables, indirect bilirubin levels rarely rise >12 mg/dL, whereas infants with several risk factors are more likely to have higher bilirubin levels. A combination of breastfeeding, variant-­glucuronosyltransferase activity (1A1), sub- clinical glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency, and alterations of the organic anion transporter-­2 gene increases the risk of hyperbilirubinemia. Predicting which neonates are at risk for exagger- ated physiologic jaundice can be based on hour-­specific bilirubin levels in the first 24-­72 hours of life (Fig. 137.3). Transcutaneous measure- ments of bilirubin are linearly correlated with serum levels and can be used for screening. Indirect bilirubin levels in full-­term infants decline to adult levels (1 mg/dL) by 10-­14 days of life. Persistent indirect hyper- bilirubinemia beyond 2 weeks suggests hemolysis, hereditary glucuro- nyl transferase deficiency, breast milk jaundice, hypothyroidism, or intestinal obstruction. Jaundice associated with pyloric stenosis may be the result of caloric deprivation, relative deficiency of hepatic UDP– glucuronyl transferase, or an increase in the enterohepatic circulation of bilirubin from an ileus. In premature infants, the rise in serum bili- rubin tends to be the same or somewhat slower but of longer duration than in term infants. Peak levels of 8-­12 mg/dL are not usually reached until the fourth to seventh day, and jaundice is infrequently observed after the 10th day, corresponding to the maturation of mechanisms for bilirubin metabolism and excretion. The diagnosis of physiologic jaundice in term or preterm infants can be established only by excluding known causes of jaundice based on the history, clinical findings, and laboratory data (see Table 137.3). In general, a search to determine the cause of jaundice should be made if (1) it appears in the first 24-­36 hours after birth, (2) serum biliru- bin is rising at a rate faster than 5 mg/dL/24 hr, (3) serum bilirubin is >12 mg/dL in a full-­term infant (especially in the absence of risk factors) or 10-­14 mg/dL in a preterm infant, (4) jaundice persists after 10-­14 days after birth, or (5) direct bilirubin fraction is >2 mg/dL at any time. Other factors suggesting a pathologic cause of jaundice are fam- ily history of hemolytic disease, pallor, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, failure of phototherapy to lower the bilirubin level, vomiting, lethargy, poor feeding, excessive weight loss, apnea, bradycardia, abnormal vital signs (including hypothermia), light-­colored stools, dark urine positive for bilirubin, bleeding disorder, and signs of kernicterus (see Chapter 137.1). PATHOLOGIC HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA Jaundice and its underlying hyperbilirubinemia are considered pathologic if the time of appearance, duration, or pattern var- ies significantly from that of physiologic jaundice, or if the course is compatible with physiologic jaundice but other reasons exist to suspect that the infant is at special risk for neurotoxicity. It may not be possible to determine the precise cause of an abnormal elevation of unconjugated bilirubin, but many infants with this finding have associated risk factors such as ethnicity, prematurity, breastfeeding, and weight loss. Frequently, the terms exaggerated physiologic jaun- dice and hyperbilirubinemia of the newborn are used in infants whose primary problem is probably a deficiency or inactivity of bilirubin glucuronyl transferase (Gilbert syndrome) rather than an excessive load of bilirubin for excretion (see Table 137.1). The combination of G6PD deficiency and a pathogenic variant of the promoter region of UDP-­glucuronyl transferase-­1 produces indirect hyperbilirubinemia in the absence of signs of hemolysis. The greatest risk associated with indirect hyperbilirubinemia is the development of bilirubin-­induced neurologic dysfunction, which typically occurs with high indirect bilirubin levels (see Chap- ter 137.1). The development of kernicterus (bilirubin encepha- lopathy) depends on the level of indirect bilirubin, duration of exposure to bilirubin elevation, the cause of jaundice, and the infant’s well-­being. Neurologic injury including kernicterus may occur at lower bilirubin levels in preterm infants and in the pres- ence of asphyxia, sepsis, meningitis, intraventricular hemorrhage, hemolysis, or drugs that displace bilirubin from albumin. The exact serum indirect bilirubin level that is harmful for very low birthweight (VLBW) infants is unclear. JAUNDICE ASSOCIATED WITH BREASTFEEDING Significant elevation in unconjugated bilirubin (breast milk jaundice) develops in an estimated 2% of breastfed term infants after the seventh day, with maximal concentrations as high as 10-­30 mg/dL reached dur- ing the second to third week. If breastfeeding is continued, the biliru- bin gradually decreases but may persist for 3-­10 weeks at lower levels. Phototherapy may be of benefit (see Chapter 137.1). Although very uncommon, kernicterus can occur in patients with breast milk jaun- dice. The etiology of breast milk jaundice is not entirely clear, although intestinal β-­glucuronidase resulting in deconjugation of bilirubin and increased enterohepatic circulation and other factors in breast milk that might interfere with bilirubin conjugation (e.g., pregnanediol, free fatty acids) have been implicated. The late jaundice associated with breast milk should be distinguished from an early onset, accentuated unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia known as suboptimal intake hyperbilirubinemia or breastfeeding jaundice, which occurs during the first week after birth in breastfed infants, who normally have higher bilirubin levels than formula-­fed infants (Fig. 137.4). Lower milk intake before breast milk production is established can result in various degrees of dehydration, which hemoconcentrates bilirubin, while also causing fewer bowel movements, which in turn increases the enterohepatic circulation of bilirubin. Prophylactic supplements of glucose water to breastfed infants are associated with higher bilirubin levels, in part because of reduced intake of the higher–caloric density breast milk and are not indicated. Frequent breastfeeding (>10 in 24 hours), rooming-­in with night feeding, and ongoing lactation support may reduce the incidence of 144 132 120 108 96 84 72 60 48 36 24 12 0 Postnatal age (hours) 0 5 10 10 20 25 Serum bilirubin (mg/dL) 0 85 171 257 342 428 High zone Low zone µmol/L 40th %ile 95th %ile 75th %i le High in terme diate z one Low inte rmediate z one Fig. 137.3  Neonatal bilirubin nomogram. Percentile designation of well newborns ≥35 weeks’ gestational age based on their hour-­specific serum bilirubin values. The high zone is subdivided by the 95th percen- tile track. The intermediate zone is subdivided into upper and lower zones by the 75th percentile track. The low zone has been electively and statistically defined by the 40th percentile track. (Modified from Bahr TM, Henry E, Christensen RD, et al. A new hour-­specific serum bilirubin nomogram for neonates ≥35 weeks of gestation. J Pediatr. 2021;236:28–33. Fig. 2.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 137  u  Jaundice and ­Hyperbilirubinemia in the Newborn  1111 early breastfeeding jaundice. In addition, supplementation with formula or more preferred expressed breast milk is appropriate if the intake seems inadequate, weight loss is excessive, or the infant appears dehydrated. NEONATAL CHOLESTASIS See Chapter 404. CONGENITAL ATRESIA OF THE BILE DUCTS See Chapter 404.1. Jaundice persisting for >2 weeks or associated with acholic stools and dark urine suggests biliary atresia. All infants with such findings require immediate diagnostic evaluation, including determination of direct bilirubin. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 137.1  Kernicterus and Therapy of Hyperbilirubinemia Kelsey S. Ryan and Robert M. Kliegman Kernicterus, or bilirubin encephalopathy, is a neurologic syndrome resulting from the deposition of unconjugated (indirect) bilirubin in the basal ganglia and brainstem nuclei. The pathogenesis of kernicterus is multifactorial and involves an interaction between unconjugated bil- irubin levels, albumin binding and unbound bilirubin levels, passage across the BBB, and neuronal susceptibility to injury. Disruption of the BBB by disease, asphyxia, infection, and other factors and maturational changes in BBB permeability affect risk. The precise blood level above which indirect-­reacting bilirubin or free bilirubin will be toxic for an individual infant is unpredictable. In a large series, however, kernicterus occurred only in infants with a bili- rubin >20 mg/dL (more often >25-­30 mg/dL), 90% of whom were pre- viously healthy, predominantly breastfed, term and near-­term infants. The duration of exposure to high bilirubin levels needed to produce toxic effects is unknown; the more immature the infant, and possibly age (day 1 vs day of life ≥4), the greater the susceptibility to kernicterus. CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS Signs and symptoms of kernicterus usually appear 2-­5 days after birth in term infants and as late as the seventh day in preterm infants, but hyperbilirubinemia may lead to encephalopathy at any time during the neonatal period. The early signs may be subtle and indistinguishable from those of sepsis, asphyxia, hypoglycemia, intracranial hemorrhage, apnea, and other acute systemic illnesses in a neonate. Lethargy, poor feeding, and loss of the Moro reflex are common initial signs. Subse- quently, the infant may appear gravely ill and prostrate, with diminished tendon reflexes and respiratory distress. Opisthotonos with a bulging fontanel, twitching of the face or limbs, and a shrill, high-­pitched cry may follow. In advanced cases, convulsions and spasm occur, with affected infants stiffly extending their arms in an inward rotation with the fists clenched (Table 137.5). Rigidity is rare at this late stage. Many infants who progress to these severe neurologic signs die; the survivors usually have serious sequalae but may appear to recover and for 2-­3 months show few abnormalities. Later in the first year, opis- thotonos, muscle rigidity, irregular movements, and convulsions tend to recur. In the second year the opisthotonos and seizures abate, but irregular, involuntary movements, muscle rigidity, or, in some infants, hypotonia increase steadily. By 3 years of age, the complete neurologic syndrome is often apparent: bilateral choreoathetosis with involuntary muscle spasms, extrapyramidal signs, seizures, mental deficiency, dys- arthric speech, high-­frequency hearing loss, squinting, and defective upward eye movements. Pyramidal signs, hypotonia, and ataxia occur in a few infants. In mildly affected infants, the syndrome may be char- acterized only by mild to moderate neuromuscular incoordination, partial deafness, or “minimal brain dysfunction,” occurring singly or in combination; these problems may be unapparent until the child enters school (see Table 137.5). INCIDENCE AND PROGNOSIS By pathologic criteria, kernicterus develops in 30% of infants (all ges- tational ages) with untreated hemolytic disease and bilirubin levels >25-­30 mg/dL. The incidence at autopsy in hyperbilirubinemic pre- term infants is 2–16% and is related to the risk factors discussed in this chapter. Reliable estimates of the frequency of the clinical syndrome are not available because of the wide spectrum of manifestations. Overt neurologic signs carry a grave prognosis; >75% of infants die, and 80% of affected survivors have bilateral choreoathetosis with involuntary muscle spasms. Developmental delay, deafness, and spastic quadriple- gia are common. PREVENTION The aim of bilirubin management is prevention of kernicterus. Although kernicterus has been thought to be a disease of the past, there are reports of neurotoxic effects of bilirubin in term and near-­term infants who were discharged as healthy newborns. Effective prevention requires ongoing vigilance and a practical, system-­based approach to distinguish infants with benign newborn jaundice from those whose course may be less predictable and potentially harmful. Predischarge universal screening for hyperbilirubinemia and assessment of clini- cal risk factors for severe jaundice and bilirubin-­induced neurologic dysfunction include either total serum bilirubin or transcutaneous bilirubin measurement (interchangeably), although transcutaneous instruments may be less accurate at higher bilirubin levels (>15 mg/ dL) or for infants with darker skin or if phototherapy has been used. If transcutaneous levels are documented as ≥15 mg/dL or rising rap- idly, confirmation with a total serum bilirubin is recommended. Serum 140 120 100 80 60 40 20 0 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 Number of infants Maximum total serum bilirubin concentration (mg/dL) Breast-fed infants Bottle-fed infants Fig. 137.4  Distribution of maximal bilirubin levels during the first week of life in breastfed and formula-­fed White infants weighing >2,500 g. (From Maisels MJ, Gifford K. Normal serum bilirubin levels in the new- born and the effect of breast-­feeding. Pediatrics. 1986;78:837–843.) Table 137.5     Clinical Features of Kernicterus ACUTE FORM Phase 1 (first 1-­2 days): poor suck, stupor, hypotonia, seizures Phase 2 (middle of first week): hypertonia of extensor muscles, opisthotonos, retrocollis, fever Phase 3 (after the first week): hypertonia CHRONIC FORM First year: hypotonia, active deep tendon reflexes, obligatory tonic neck reflexes, delayed motor skills After first year: movement disorders (choreoathetosis, ballismus, tremor), upward gaze, sensorineural hearing loss From Dennery PA, Seidman DS, Stevenson DK. Neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. N Engl J Med 2001;344:581–590. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1112  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant values should also be measured once infants begin phototherapy, because transcutaneous measurement may falsely underestimate total bilirubin in this setting. Protocols using the hour-­specific bilirubin nomogram (see Fig. 137.3), physical examination, and clinical risk factors have been suc- cessful in identifying patients at risk for hyperbilirubinemia and candidates for targeted management. Potentially preventable causes of kernicterus include (1) early discharge (<48 hours) with no early follow-­up (within 48 hours of discharge), a problem that is particularly important in near-­term infants (35-­37 weeks of gestation); (2) failure to check the bilirubin level in an infant noted to be jaundiced in the first 24 hours; (3) failure to recognize the presence of risk factors for hyper- bilirubinemia, especially hemolysis; (4) underestimation of the severity of jaundice by clinical (visual) assessment, which is inaccurate; (5) lack of concern regarding the presence of jaundice; (6) delay in measuring the serum bilirubin level despite marked jaundice or delay in initiating phototherapy in the presence of elevated bilirubin levels; and (7) fail- ure to respond to parental concern regarding jaundice, poor feeding, or lethargy. Figure 137.5 provides a consensus-­based (expert opinion) management plan for neonates with significant hyperbilirubinemia that relies on consensus-­recommended (expert opinion) phototherapy thresholds for gestational ages ≥35 weeks (Figs. 137.6 and 137.7) in well appearing neonates. The following approach is further recommended: (1) any infant who is jaundiced before 24 hours requires measurement of total and direct serum bilirubin levels and, if elevated, evaluation for possible hemolytic or primary hepatic diseases, and (2) follow-­up should be provided within 2-­3 days of discharge to all neonates discharged earlier than 48 hours after birth. Early follow-­up is particularly important for infants <38 weeks of gestation. The timing of follow-­up depends on the age at discharge and the presence of risk factors. In some cases, follow-­up within 24 hours is necessary. Postdischarge follow- ­up is essential for early recognition of problems related to hyper- bilirubinemia and disease progression. Parental communication with regard to concerns about the infant’s skin color and behavioral activities should be addressed early and frequently, including edu- cation about potential risks and neurotoxicity. Ongoing lactation promotion, education, support, and follow-­up services are essen- tial throughout the neonatal period. Parents should be advised to nurse their infants 8-12 times in 24 hours and to avoid supplemen- tation with water or glucose water to ensure adequate hydration and caloric intake. TREATMENT OF HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA Regardless of the cause, the goal of therapy is to prevent neurotox- icity related to indirect-­reacting bilirubin while causing no undue harm. Phototherapy and, if unsuccessful, exchange transfusion remain the primary treatment modalities used to keep the maxi- mal total serum bilirubin below pathologic levels (Table 137.6; see Figs. 137.6 and 137.7). The risk of injury to the central nervous sys- tem from bilirubin must be balanced against the potential risk of treatment. Because phototherapy may require 6-­12 hours to have a measurable effect, it must be started at bilirubin levels below those indicated for exchange transfusion. When identified, underlying Phototherapy threshold minus TcB or TSDB Discharge recommendations 0.1-1.9 mg/dL Age <24 hours Delay discharge, consider phototherapy, measure TSB in 4 to 8 hours Age ≥24 hours Measure TSB in 4 to 24 hoursa Options: • Delay discharge and consider phototherapy • Discharge with home phototherapy if all considerations in the guideline are met • Discharge without phototherapy but with close follow-up 2.0-3.4 mg/dL Regardless of age or discharge time TSB or TcB in 4 to 24 hoursa 3.5-5.4 mg/dL Regardless of age or discharge time TSB or TcB in 1-2 days 5.5-6.9 mg/dL Discharging <72 hours Follow-up within 2 days; TcB or TSB according to clinical judgmentb Discharging ≥72 hours Clinical judgmentb ≥7.0 mg/dL Discharging <72 hours Follow-up within 3 days; TcB or TSB according to clinical judgmentb Discharging ≥72 hours Clinical judgmentb Start (TcB or TSB measure in infant ≥12 hours old) TSB at or above the phototherapy threshold? • Determine hour-specific phototherapy threshold based on gestational age and presence of a known hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factor • Measure TSB if TcB exceeds 3.0 mg/dL below the phototherapy treatment threshold or if the TcB is ≥15 mg/dL. No Yes Begin phototherapy Fig. 137.5  Algorithm to determine postdischarge follow-­up for infants who have not received phototherapy during the birth hospitalization. aUse clinical judgment and shared decision-­making to determine when to repeat the bilirubin measure within this 4–24-­hour time window. bClinical judg- ment decisions should include physical examination, the presence of risk factors for the development of hyperbilirubinemia or hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factors, feeding adequacy, weight trajectory, and family support. TcB, Transcutaneous bilirubin; TSB, total serum bilirubin. (From Kemper AR, Newman TB, Slaughter JL, et al. Clinical practice guideline revision: management of hyperbilirubinemia in the newborn infant 35 or more weeks of gestation. Pediatrics. 2022; 150[3]:e2022058859. Fig. 7.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 137  u  Jaundice and ­Hyperbilirubinemia in the Newborn  1113 60 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 96 108 120 132 144 156 168 180 192 204 216 228 240 252 264 276 288 300 312 324 336 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 (1d) (2d) (3d) (4d) (5d) (6d) (7d) (8d) (9d) (10d) (11d) (12d) (13d) (14d) Age – hours Total Serum Bilirubin (mg/dL) Gestational Age 40 Weeks 39 Weeks 38 Weeks 37 Weeks 36 Weeks 35 Weeks Phototherapy Thresholds: No Hyperbilirubinemia Neurotoxicity Risk Factors Fig. 137.6  Phototherapy thresholds by gestational age and age in hours for infants with no recognized hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factors other than gestational age. These thresholds are based on expert opinion rather than strong evidence on when the potential benefits of phototherapy exceed its potential harms. Use total serum bilirubin concentrations; do not subtract direct-­reacting or conjugated bilirubin from the total serum bilirubin. In rare cases of severe hyperbilirubinemia in which the direct-­reacting or conjugated bilirubin exceeds 50% of the TSB, consult an expert. Note that infants <24 hours old with a TSB at or above the phototherapy threshold are likely to have a hemolytic process and should be evaluated for hemolytic disease. Hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factors include gestational age <38 weeks; albumin <3.0 g/dL; isoimmune hemolytic disease, glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency, or other hemolytic conditions; sepsis; or any significant clinical instability in the previous 24 hours. (From Kemper AR, Newman TB, Slaughter JL, et al. Clinical practice guideline revision: management of hyperbilirubinemia in the newborn infant 35 or more weeks of gestation. Pediatrics. 2022;150[3]:e2022058859. Fig. 2.) 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 0 12 24 (1d) 36 48 (2d) 60 72 (3d) 84 96 (4d) 108 120 (5d) 132 144 (6d) 156 168 (7d) 180 192 (8d) 204 216 (9d) 228 240 (10d) 252 264 (11d) 276 288 (12d) 300 312 (13d) 324 336 (14d) Age – hours Total Serum Bilirubin (mg/dL) Gestational Age 38 Weeks 37 Weeks 36 Weeks 35 Weeks Phototherapy Thresholds: One or More Hyperbilirubinemia Neurotoxicity Risk Factors Fig. 137.7  Phototherapy thresholds by gestational age and age in hours for infants with any recognized hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk fac- tors other than gestational age. These thresholds are based on expert opinion rather than strong evidence on when the potential benefits of photo- therapy exceed its potential harms. Use total serum bilirubin concentrations; do not subtract the direct-­reacting or conjugated bilirubin from the total serum bilirubin. In rare cases of severe hyperbilirubinemia in which the direct-­reacting or conjugated bilirubin exceeds 50% of the TSB, consult an expert. Hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factors include gestational age <38 weeks; albumin <3.0 g/dL; isoimmune hemolytic disease, glucose-­ 6-­phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency, or other hemolytic conditions; sepsis; or any significant clinical instability in the previous 24 hours. (From Kemper AR, Newman TB, Slaughter JL, et al. Clinical practice guideline revision: management of hyperbilirubinemia in the newborn infant 35 or more weeks of gestation. Pediatrics. 2022:150[3]:e2022058859. Fig. 3.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1114  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant medical causes of elevated bilirubin and physiologic factors that contribute to neuronal susceptibility should be treated, such as antibiotics for sepsis, correction of acidosis, and dehydration (Fig. 137.8). Phototherapy Clinical jaundice and indirect hyperbilirubinemia are reduced by expo- sure to high-­intensity light in the visible spectrum. Bilirubin absorbs light maximally in the blue range (420-­470 nm). Broad-­spectrum white, blue, and special narrow-­spectrum (super) blue lights have been effective in reducing bilirubin levels. Bilirubin in the skin absorbs light energy, causing several photochemical reactions. One major product from phototherapy is a result of a reversible photoisomerization reac- tion converting the toxic native unconjugated 4Z,15Z-­bilirubin into an unconjugated configurational isomer, 4Z,15E-­bilirubin, which can then be excreted in bile without conjugation. The other major prod- uct from phototherapy is lumirubin, which is an irreversible structural isomer converted from native bilirubin that can be excreted by the kid- neys in the unconjugated state. The therapeutic effect of phototherapy depends on the light energy emitted in the effective range of wavelengths, the distance between the lights and the infant, and the surface area of exposed skin, as well as the rate of hemolysis and in vivo metabolism and excretion of bilirubin. Available commercial phototherapy units vary considerably in spec- tral output and the intensity of radiance emitted; therefore the watt- age can be accurately measured only at the patient’s skin surface. Dark skin does not reduce the efficacy of phototherapy. Maximal intensive phototherapy should be used when indirect bilirubin levels approach those noted in Figures 137.6 and 137.7. Such therapy includes using LED lamps and/or putting a fiberoptic phototherapy blanket under the infant’s back to increase the exposed surface area. The use of phototherapy has decreased the need for exchange trans- fusion in term and preterm infants with hemolytic and nonhemolytic jaundice. When indications for exchange transfusion are present, pho- totherapy should not be used as a substitute; however, phototherapy may reduce the need for repeated exchange transfusions in infants with hemolysis. Conventional phototherapy is applied continuously (except for breastfeeding). It should be discontinued as soon as the indirect bil- irubin concentration has reduced to levels considered safe with respect to the infant’s age and condition. Serum bilirubin levels and hematocrit should be monitored every 4-­8 hours in infants with hemolytic dis- ease and those with bilirubin levels near toxic range. Serum bilirubin monitoring should continue for at least 24 hours after cessation of pho- totherapy in patients with hemolytic disease, because unexpected rises in bilirubin may occur, requiring further treatment. Skin color, visual assessment, or transcutaneous bilirubin levels cannot be relied on for evaluating the effectiveness of phototherapy; the skin of babies exposed to light may appear to be almost without jaundice in the presence of marked hyperbilirubinemia. Although not necessary for all affected infants, intravenous fluid supplementation added to oral feedings are beneficial in dehydrated patients or infants with bilirubin levels near- ing those requiring exchange transfusion. Complications associated with phototherapy include loose stools, erythematous macular rash, purpuric rash associated with transient porphyrinemia, hypothermia from exposure, and a benign condi- tion called “bronze baby syndrome,” which occurs in the presence of direct hyperbilirubinemia. Phototherapy is contraindicated in the presence of porphyria. Before phototherapy is initiated, the infant’s eyes should be closed and adequately covered to prevent light expo- sure and corneal damage. Body temperature should be monitored, and the infant should be shielded from bulb breakage and fluores- cent bulb use. Irradiance should be measured directly. In infants with hemolytic disease, care must be taken to monitor for the development Table 137.6     Suggested Maximal Indirect Serum Bilirubin Concentrations (mg/dL) in Preterm Infants BIRTHWEIGHT (g) UNCOMPLICATED* COMPLICATED* <1,000 12-­13 10-­12 1,000-­1,250 12-­14 10-­12 1,251-­1,499 14-­16 12-­14 1,500-­1,999 16-­20 15-­17 2,000-­2,500 20-­22 18-­20 *Complications include perinatal asphyxia, acidosis, hypoxia, hypothermia, hypoalbuminemia, meningitis, intraventricular hemorrhage, hemolysis, hypoglycemia, or signs of kernicterus. Phototherapy is usually started at 50–70% of the maximal indirect level. If values greatly exceed this level, if phototherapy is unsuccessful in reducing the maximal bilirubin level, or if signs of kernicterus are evident, exchange transfusion is indicated. Start (TSB exceeds escalation of care level) • Consult neonatologist • Initiate urgent transfer to NICU, directly if possible • Intensive phototherapy and PO+IV hydration during transfer, if possible At appropriate location for exchange transfusion? • STAT labs: total and direct serum bilirubin, CBC and blood smear, albumin, serum chemistries, type and cross match • Notify blood bank • Measure TSB at least every 2 hours • Intensive phototherapy and PO+IV hydration • Consider IVIG therapy Acute bilirubin encephalopathy OR Latest TSB at or above the exchange transfusion threshold? Urgent exchange transfusion Yes No Continue intensive phototherapy and PO+IV hydration and measuring TSB at least every 2 hours Return to regular phototherapy guidelines Yes TSB below the escalation-of-care level? No No Yes Fig. 137.8  Approach to escalation of care. The escalation-­of-­care threshold is 2 mg/dL below the exchange transfusion threshold. IVIG, Intrave- nous immunoglobulin; NICU, neonatal intensive care unit; PO, orally; TSB, total serum bilirubin. (Modified from Kemper AR, Newman TB, Slaughter JL, et al. Clinical practice guideline revision: management of hyperbilirubinemia in the newborn infant 35 or more weeks of gestation. Pediatrics. 2022;150[3]:e2022058859. Fig. 4.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 137  u  Jaundice and Hyperbilirubinemia in the Newborn  1115 of anemia, which may require transfusion; anemia may develop despite lowering of bilirubin levels. Clinical experience suggests that long-­term adverse biologic effects of phototherapy are absent, mini- mal, or unrecognized. The term bronze baby syndrome refers to a dark, grayish brown skin discoloration sometimes noted in infants undergoing phototherapy. Almost all infants observed with this syndrome have had significant elevation of direct-­reacting bilirubin and other evidence of obstructive liver disease. The discoloration may result from photo-­induced modi- fication of porphyrins, which are often present during cholestatic jaun- dice and may last for many months. Despite the bronze baby syndrome, phototherapy can continue if needed. Intravenous Immunoglobulin The administration of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) is an adjunctive treatment for hyperbilirubinemia caused by isoimmune hemolytic disease. It has been used when serum bilirubin is approach- ing exchange levels despite maximal interventions, including photo- therapy. IVIG (0.5-­1.0 g/kg/dose; repeat in 12 hours) may reduce the need for exchange transfusion in both ABO and Rh hemolytic disease, presumably by reducing hemolysis. The effectiveness is unclear. Exchange Transfusion Double-­volume exchange transfusion is performed if intensive pho- totherapy has failed to reduce bilirubin levels to a safe range and the risk of kernicterus exceeds the procedural risk. Potential complica- tions from exchange transfusion are not trivial and include metabolic acidosis, electrolyte abnormalities, hypoglycemia, hypocalcemia, thrombocytopenia, volume overload, arrhythmias, necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC), infection, graft versus host disease, and death. This widely accepted treatment is repeated if necessary to keep indi- rect bilirubin levels in a safe range (Fig. 137.9). Ideally the exchange transfusion should be performed with leukocyte-­depleted, washed fresh-­packed RBC’s, reconstructed with fresh-­frozen plasma to a hematocrit of ∼40%. It should be cross matched against the neonate and the mother. Various factors may influence the decision to perform a double-­ volume exchange transfusion in an individual patient (see Fig. 137.8). The appearance of clinical signs suggesting kernicterus is an absolute indication for exchange transfusion at any level of serum bilirubin. A hydropic jaundiced neonate with erythroblastosis from Rh disease will be critically ill and requires exchange transfusion at much lower levels than recommended in Figures 137.9 and 137.10. See other risk factors affecting exchange transfusion threshold in Figure 137.10. A healthy full-­term infant with physiologic or breast milk jaundice may tolerate a bilirubin concentration slightly higher than 25 mg/dL with no apparent ill effect, whereas kernicterus may develop in a sick premature infant at a significantly lower level. A level approaching that considered critical for the individual infant may be an indication for exchange transfusion during the first or second day after birth, when a further rise is anticipated, but not typically after the fourth day in a term infant or after the seventh day in a preterm infant, because an imminent decrease in bilirubin levels may be anticipated as the hepatic conjugating mechanism becomes more effective. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 (1d) (2d) (3d) (4d) (5d) (6d) (7d) (8d) (9d) (10d) (11d) (12d) (13d) (14d) Age − hours (days) Total Serum Bilirubin (mg/dL) Gestational Age 38 Weeks 37 Weeks 36 Weeks 35 Weeks Exchange Transfusion Thresholds: No Hyperbilirubinemia Neurotoxicity Risk Factors 0 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 96 108 120 132 144 156 168 180 192 204 216 228 240 252 264 276 288 300 312 324 336 Fig. 137.9  Exchange transfusion thresholds by gestational age for infants with no recognized hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factors other than gestational age. These thresholds are based on expert opinion rather than strong evidence on when the potential benefits of escalation of care exceed its potential harms. The stippled lines for the first 24 hours indicate uncertainty because of the wide range of clinical circumstances and responses to intensive phototherapy. Use total serum bilirubin concentrations; do not subtract direct bilirubin from the total serum bilirubin. In rare cases of severe hyperbilirubinemia in which the direct-­reacting or conjugated bilirubin exceeds 50% of the TSB, consult an expert. Hyperbilirubine- mia neurotoxicity risk factors include albumin <3.0 g/dL; isoimmune hemolytic disease, glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency, or other hemolytic conditions; sepsis; or any significant clinical instability in the previous 24 hours. (From Kemper AR, Newman TB, Slaughter JL, et al. Clinical practice guideline revision: management of hyperbilirubinemia in the newborn infant 35 or more weeks of gestation. Pediatrics. 2022;150[3]:e2022058859. Fig. 5.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1116  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 0 12 24 (1d) 36 48 (2d) 60 72 (3d) 84 96 (4d) 108 120 (5d) 132 144 (6d) 156 168 (7d) 180 192 (8d) 204 216 (9d) 228 240 (10d) 252 264 (11d) 276 288 (12d) 300 312 (13d) 324 336 (14d) Age – hours (days) Total Serum Bilirubin (mg/dL) Gestational Age 38 Weeks 37 Weeks 36 Weeks 35 Weeks Exchange Transfusion Thresholds: 1 or More Hyperbilirubinemia Neurotoxicity Risk Factors Fig. 137.10  Exchange transfusion thresholds by gestational age for infants with any recognized hyperbilirubinemia neurotoxicity risk factors other than gestational age. These thresholds are based on expert opinion rather than strong evidence on when the potential benefits of escalation of care exceed its potential harms. The stippled lines for the first 24 hours indicate uncertainty because of the wide range of clinical circumstances and responses to intensive phototherapy. Use total serum bilirubin concentrations; do not subtract direct bilirubin from the total serum bilirubin. In rare cases of severe hyperbilirubinemia in which the direct-­reacting or conjugated bilirubin exceeds 50% of the TSB, consult an expert. Hyperbilirubine- mia neurotoxicity risk factors include albumin <3.0 g/dL; isoimmune hemolytic disease, glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency, or other hemolytic conditions; sepsis; or any significant clinical instability in the previous 24 hours. (From Kemper AR, Newman TB, Slaughter JL, et al. Clinical practice guideline revision: management of hyperbilirubinemia in the newborn infant 35 or more weeks of gestation. Pediatrics. 2022;150[3]:e2022058859. Fig. 6.) NORMAL ERYTHROPOIESIS AND HEMOGLOBIN FUNCTIONS The diagnosis of anemia or polycythemia, and interpretation of labo- ratory values, requires understanding normal hemoglobin-­oxygen binding and delivery physiology. Heterotetrameric hemoglobin, com- prising two α-­globin and two β-­globin monomers, has an exquisite ability to cooperatively bind and release oxygen molecules in response to environmental conditions. Hemoglobin switching refers to the nor- mal transitions in gene expression among embryonic, fetal, and adult globins that occur before and after birth (Fig. 138.1). Fetal hemoglobin (HbF) is the predominant hemoglobin molecule produced during late gestation. Its increased oxygen affinity compared with maternal adult hemoglobin (HbA) facilitates oxygen transfer in the hypoxic in utero environment, which lacks direct atmospheric gas exchange. Relative in utero hypoxia explains the elevated hemoglobin levels normally seen in newborns, which can be exacerbated by pathologic chronic intra- uterine hypoxia. NORMAL RED BLOOD CELL INDICES IN NEONATES AND INFANTS Diagnosing anemia or polycythemia in infants also relies on compari- sons to normal reference ranges, which vary based on gestational and postnatal age. Normal reference ranges for hemoglobin, hematocrit, and other erythrocyte indices are based on measurements from more than 25,000 preterm and term infants through the first 28 days of life (Fig. 138.2). Hemoglobin and hematocrit levels exhibit linear increases between 22 and 40 weeks of gestation. Erythrocyte mean corpuscular volume (MCV) in neonates is typi- cally higher than toddlers or older children, with normal values ranging from approximately 100-­115 fL at birth (see Fig. 138.2C). Reasons for this finding are multifactorial. An elevated MCV can reflect an increase in circulating reticulocytes (immature erythrocytes), although a rela- tive reticulocytosis in neonates is inadequate to fully explain the MCV elevation. Indeed, mature erythrocytes are larger in neonates than in adults. The size discrepancy may be related to the presence of differ- ent hemoglobin molecules, as mature erythrocytes containing HbF (termed F cells) may be larger than HbA-­containing cells. Conversely, MCV <100 fL in a neonate should prompt suspicion for underlying α-­ thalassemia/thalassemia trait, maternal iron deficiency, or chronic fetal to maternal blood loss. At any age, increased MCV can indicate hemolysis or other pro- cesses that enhance erythropoietic drive. Persistent microcytic anemia can result from thalassemia or iron deficiency. Platelet Count Abnormalities in Pediatric Patients Hematopoiesis, megakaryopoiesis, and thrombopoiesis produce ∼1011 platelets per day to facilitate normal blood clotting and fulfill impor- tant vascular functions (see Chapter 495). Processes that disrupt plate- let production or consumption can significantly alter steady-­state platelet quantities in circulation. This can be clinically relevant and require intervention, although many etiologies are transient and/or benign. Here we describe common etiologies that increase or decrease platelet counts. Chapter 533 includes a full description of these and other platelet defects. Thrombocytosis is defined as >450 × 109 platelets/L blood, although for neonates this limit can be raised to >600 × 109 platelets/L. Thrombocytosis can be stratified from mild to extreme, the latter defined as >1,000 × 109 Chapter 138 Blood Disorders Christopher S. Thom and Michele P. Lambert Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 138  u  Blood Disorders  1117 platelets/L. Immature immune or hematopoietic systems may underlie an increased rate of thrombocytosis in infants and young children. Myeloproliferative disorders can cause primary thrombocytosis, but this is rare in children. More often, thrombocytosis reflects a second- ary or reactive process as part of an acute phase response. This is usu- ally due to an inflammatory process and does not increase thrombotic risk in children. Extreme thrombocytosis is rare, and it can be more worrisome for infection, iron deficiency, or other inflammatory pathol- ogy. However, even extremely elevated platelet counts do not seem to increase risk of hemorrhage or thrombosis. Thus most often, throm- bocytosis will resolve spontaneously, or after treatment of the inciting etiology, without adverse sequelae. Thrombocytopenia is defined as platelets count <150 × 109 platelets/L blood. However, increased bleeding risk does not typically occur unless platelet counts decline to <20 × 109 platelets/L. Congenital and acquired processes underlie a broad differential diagnosis for thrombocytopenia that is described in Chapter 533. Different immune and nonimmune pro- cesses can cause thrombocytopenia at different stages of infancy or later childhood, with wide-­ranging health implications. NEUTROPENIA White blood cells provide innate and adaptive immune functions. The neutrophil is a key component of innate immune surveillance, and dis- orders that affect neutrophil number and function can result in varied clinical consequences (see Chapter 168). Neutropenia is defined as an absolute neutrophil count (ANC) <1,500/μL blood, but typically increases infection risk only when ANC falls <500/μL. Many processes affecting the survival of neutrophils and their precursor cells can cause neutropenia, including situations wherein antineutrophil antibodies increase neutrophil destruction and clearance. Autoimmune neutropenia results from a patient’s own neutrophil-­ targeted antibodies. It is among the most common etiologies of neu- tropenia in infants and toddlers, rarely results in significant infections or complications, and generally resolves by the time the child is school age. Neonatal isoimmune neutropenia results from transplacental pas- sage of maternal antineutrophil antibodies in a process akin to red blood cell (RBC) antigen-­targeted antibodies in hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn (see Chapter 140). Importantly, these scenarios do not typically incur additional infection risks for patients. In fact, they are typically diagnosed incidentally after noting abnormalities on a complete blood count obtained for other reasons. Reassurance, with or without repeat laboratory testing, is typically all that is required. Counts will virtually always normalize spontaneously. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 0 5 10 15 20 25 HGB Gestational Age (weeks) 22 23 24 30 33 34 37 38 39 40 41 25 26 27 28 29 32 31 35 36 Mean 5%ile 95%ile 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 HCT 22 23 24 30 33 34 37 38 39 40 41 25 26 27 28 29 32 31 35 36 Gestational Age (weeks) Mean 5%ile 95%ile 90 95 100 105 110 115 120 125 130 135 140 MCV (fL) Weeks Gestation 22 23 24 30 33 34 37 38 39 40 41 25 26 27 28 29 32 31 35 36 42 A B C Fig. 138.2  Reference range for hematocrit (HCT) and hemoglobin (HGB) concentration according to gestational age. A and B, Reference ranges (5th percentile, mean, and 95th percentile) are shown for blood HGB (A) and HCT (B). Concentrations were obtained during the first 6 hours after birth, among patients at 22-­42 weeks of gestation. Values were excluded if the diagnosis included abruption, placenta previa, or known fetal anemia, or if a blood transfusion was given before the first HGB was measured. C, Reference ranges for mean corpuscular volume (MCV) in neonates on first day after birth. The lower line shows the 5th percentile values, the middle line shows the mean values, and the upper line shows the 95th percentile values. (From Christensen RD, Jopling HE, Jopling J, Wiedmeier SE. The CBC: Reference ranges for neonates. Semin Perinatol. 2009;33[1]:3–11.) 100 Hemoglobins: % of total 80 60 40 20 0 A—a2b2 Ag Gg A2—a2d2 F—a2g2 F A A B a2e2 a b b d z2g2 z e z2e2 50 Globin subunits: % of total 40 30 20 10 0 0 10 3 5 10 15 20 Crown–Rump 5 cm 20 30 BIRTH FETUS NEWBORN 10 20 30 40WK Fig. 138.1  Developmental changes in (A) hemoglobin tetramers and (B) globin subunit expression from early gestation through infancy. (From Polin RA, Fox WW. Fetal and Neonatal Physiology. 2nd ed. Phila- delphia: Saunders; 1998. p. 1769.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1118  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant Anemia is extremely common worldwide, affecting an estimated 25% of the global population, and carries a broad differential diagnosis in infants and children. Etiologies may be acute or chronic, with clinical manifestations ranging from an asymptomatic laboratory finding to life-­threatening signs and symptoms. Because anemia can result from decreased erythrocyte production, increased erythrocyte destruction, erythrocyte dysfunction, or blood loss, the differential diagnosis of anemia can be complex (Table 139.1). Careful consideration of details related to the patient’s history and presentation can facilitate rapid diag- nosis. Additional relevant details in neonates include gestational age and general health, perinatal course and delivery, and maternal health from early pregnancy through delivery and the postpartum period. THE PHYSIOLOGIC NADIR DURING INFANCY An abrupt increase in oxygen tension and arterial hemoglobin saturation, a shift in the oxygen dissociation curve due to a switch from high oxygen affinity fetal hemoglobin (HbF) to low oxygen affinity adult hemoglobin (HbA), increased postnatal 2,3-­diphosphoglycerate (increasing oxygen delivery through cooperativity), and adaptive cardiovascular mecha- nisms all contribute to increased oxygen delivery to tissues and can rap- idly reduce erythropoietin levels postnatally. These mechanisms result in reduced erythropoiesis in the bone marrow after a week of life. Combined with the shorter half-­life of neonatal erythrocytes compared to adult eryth- rocytes (60 days vs 120 days), full-­term infants normally experience a slow decline in hemoglobin to 9-­11 g/dL over 6-­10 weeks (Fig. 139.1). Eventu- ally, the reduction in hemoglobin concentration reduces oxygen delivery enough to stimulate erythropoietic drive, and hemoglobin levels subse- quently rebound to “normal” levels for later life (see Fig. 139.1). These typi- cal developmental and physiologic processes culminating in a decreased hemoglobin level are termed the physiologic nadir. Preterm infants experience a more pronounced, earlier nadir, with hemoglobin levels falling to 8-­9 g/dL over 4-­8 weeks. One reason for the more dramatic nadir in preterm infants is reduced iron stores, because most iron is normally transferred to the fetus during the third trimester. The nadir in preterm infants is also a consequence of a reduced starting hemoglobin at birth; iatrogenic blood loss; and more significant cardiore- spiratory disease, inadequate nutrition, and infections. Still, a hemoglobin level <8 typically prompts a transfusion and/or hematologist consultation. Normal physiologic changes in hemoglobin concentration should be considered when diagnosing anemia in neonates and early infants. For example, a neonate may be considered anemic if the hemoglobin level declines below the 5th percentile for age (see Fig. 139.1, lower dashed lines). Interventions should occur only in response to clinical signs and symptoms that occur as disease sequelae with referral to subspecialty care for further evaluation and management as appropriate. ANEMIA CLASSIFICATIONS AND KEY DIAGNOSTIC MODALITIES Anemia can result from blood loss, erythrocyte destruction (hemoly- sis), or underproduction of erythrocytes. Common etiologies are sum- marized in Table 139.1. In many cases, the clinical context, physical examination, and medical history, including review of the patient’s history and clinical course, can be diagnostic. However, a simple and efficient laboratory workup can facilitate rapid definitive diagnosis and suggest an effective treatment strategy (Fig. 139.2). In many cases, a CBC and the reticulocyte count can identify the diag- nosis. Additional testing that is particularly helpful in neonatal diagno- sis includes a direct antiglobulin test, serum bilirubin, infant blood type, and maternal blood type (ABO and Rh). Prenatal screening routinely includes indirect (serum) antiglobulin testing for maternal erythrocyte alloantibodies. The infant’s peripheral blood smear can identify nucleated erythrocytes secondary to compensatory active erythropoiesis, as well as distinct erythrocyte morphologies (e.g., elliptocytes, acanthocytes) reflect- ing hemolytic anemia. Spherocytes and microspherocytes can suggest immune-­mediated hemolysis or hereditary spherocytosis (HS), which can be differentiated by the direct antiglobulin test (DAT; formerly the direct Coombs test; Fig. 139.3). Importantly, neonatal blood smears often include atypical erythrocyte morphology with macrocytosis, poikilocytosis, and anisocytosis, which can result from normal erythropoiesis at that age and preclude definitive diagnosis. An experienced hematology-­pathologist is needed to identify truly pathologic features (Table 139.2; see Chapter 496). Specialized testing to diagnose various red cell membrane disorders and enzyme deficiencies, as well as hemoglobin quantitation for evalua- tion for specific hemoglobin disorders, may be performed in consultation with a specialist. Some states routinely screen newborns for glucose-­6-­ phosphate-­dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency. Further, universal screen- ing in the United States for sickle cell disease has markedly improved health outcomes by facilitating early penicillin prophylaxis, although much work remains to be done. Inadequate Red Blood Cell Production Whereas normal RBC underproduction after birth results in the physio- logic nadir, this process can be more significant in preterm infants, requir- ing transfusions and other supportive therapy. Anemia of prematurity is largely due to iatrogenic losses (phlebotomy) and is exacerbated by acute or chronic illness, comorbidities of prematurity, and decreased iron stores. Iron-­deficiency anemia is the most common cause of anemia world- wide, and can occur during infancy or in older children. Iron is required Chapter 139 Anemia in the Newborn Infant Christopher S. Thom and Michele P. Lambert Table 139.1     Differential Diagnosis of Neonatal Anemia BLOOD LOSS • Iatrogenic blood loss (phlebotomy) • Placental hemorrhage • Placental previa • Injury of umbilical or placental vessels • Fetomaternal transfusion • Fetoplacental transfusion • Twin-­twin transfusion • Acute perinatal hemorrhage (e.g., cesarean birth, other obstetric trauma) • Chronic in utero blood loss ↑ RBC DESTRUCTION Immune-­Mediated Hemolysis • Rh incompatibility • ABO incompatibility • Minor antigen incompatibility RBC Membrane Disorders • Hereditary spherocytosis • Hereditary elliptocytosis • Hereditary pyropoikilocytosis • Hereditary stomatocytosis RBC Enzyme Disorders • G6PD deficiency • Pyruvate kinase deficiency ↓ RBC PRODUCTION • Physiologic anemia and anemia of prematurity • Infection (rubella, CMV, parvovirus B19) • Bone marrow suppression (acute stress in perinatal period) • Hemoglobinopathy (γ-­globin mutation, unstable β-­hemoglobinopathy, α-­thalassemia major) • Bone marrow suppression (CMV, EBV) • Diamond-­Blackfan anemia • Schwachman-­Diamond syndrome • Congenital dyserythropoietic anemia • Fanconi anemia • Pearson syndrome • Congenital leukemia CMV, Cytomegalovirus, EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; G6PD, glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 139  u  Anemia in the Newborn Infant  1119 for hemoglobin tetramer construction, so erythropoiesis demands ample iron be present to form hemoglobinized RBCs. Insufficient iron stores, either through chronic blood loss or inadequate iron intake, hinder eryth- ropoiesis. RBCs will be uniformly microcytic (mean corpuscular volume [MCV] <80 fL) and hypochromic on the blood smear. Ferritin, transferrin, and reticulocyte quantities will be low. In addition to anemia, iron defi- ciency predisposes to thrombocytosis. This is a result of effects on hemato- poietic progenitor cell lineage commitment, among potential mechanisms. Iron supplementation at doses of 3-­6 mg/kg/day can effectively treat this condition; once-­daily treatment is better than divided doses due to poten- tial induction of hepcidin with frequent iron supplementation. Acquired conditions may also suppress bone marrow erythrocyte production in neonates and older children (Table 139.3). Numerous bacterial and viral infections may suppress erythropoiesis and contrib- ute to anemia, from prenatal TORCH (toxoplasmosis, other viral agents, rubella, cytomegalovirus [CMV], herpes simplex) infections and parvo- virus B19 to sepsis. Congenital conditions may result in anemia due to decreased red cell production. These rare disorders may manifest early in the neonatal period, but more commonly present in later infancy or early childhood. Etiologies include the bone marrow failure syndromes (Fan- coni anemia, Schwachman-­Diamond syndrome, Diamond-­Blackfan anemia, Aase syndrome congenital dyserythropoietic anemia, dyskera- tosis congenita, Pearson syndrome), the thalassemias (α, β, or HbE), and infant leukemias, among others (see Tables 139.1 and 139.3). Increased Red Cell Destruction: The Hemolytic Anemias Increased rates of RBC destruction cause hemolytic anemia. This most often occurs via immune-­mediated mechanisms, when RBC antigen incompatibilities exist between infants and mothers, or as a result of autoimmune disease in later childhood. However, intrinsic abnormali- ties in the erythrocyte membrane, hemoglobin, or other enzymes can also increase hemolysis. Severe hemolytic anemias can cause hyperbilirubine- mia necessitating intervention (Fig. 139.4). For example, hemolytic dis- ease of the fetus and newborn (HDFN), also known as erythroblastosis fetalis, results in often severe alloimmune hemolysis from maternal anti- bodies targeting paternally derived RBC antigens (see Chapter 140). Congenital erythrocyte membrane disorders can cause clinically significant hemolytic anemia and jaundice in the neonatal period and beyond. Key structural proteins and lipid components are necessary to produce durable, flexible, biconcave erythrocyte membranes capable of deforming and squeezing through tiny capillaries. Genetic abnormali- ties in integral membrane proteins (e.g., ankyrin, band 3, α-­spectrin, β-­spectrin, protein 4.2) destabilize the RBC membrane and decrease cellular deformability, increasing splenic entrapment. HS is the most common RBC membrane disorder, affecting 1 in 2,500-­5,000 individu- als of European descent. HS is most often caused by pathogenic vari- ants in genes coding for ankyrin or spectrin and is characterized by spherical erythrocytes on the blood smear (see Fig. 139.3; see Chapter 507). Most infants born with HS will develop jaundice early in the new- born period. Treatment is largely supportive. Most patients with mild disease require little intervention, whereas those with more severe hemo- lysis sometimes require RBC transfusions or splenectomy. Hereditary elliptocytosis (HE), another erythrocyte membranopathy, is typically less severe than HS. HE is characterized by elliptical-­shaped erythro- cytes on the peripheral blood smear and may be underdiagnosed given the extremely mild clinical presentation. A more clinically significant membranopathy is hereditary pyropoikilo- cytosis (HPP), an autosomal recessive disorder with striking dysmorphol- ogy (poikilocytosis) on the peripheral blood smear. HPP is most common B A C D 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 Hematocrit, % Day of life 0 10 15 20 25 Hemoglobin, g/dL Day of life 5 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 Hematocrit, % Day of life 0 10 15 20 25 Hemoglobin, g/dL Day of life 5 Fig. 139.1  Reference range for hematocrit and hemoglobin concentration during the first 28 days of life. A and B, Late preterm and term infants (35-­42 weeks’ gestation). C and D, Preterm infants (29-­34 weeks’ gestation). The reference ranges are shown for hematocrit (A and C) (41,957 pa- tients) and blood hemoglobin (B and D) (39,559 patients) during the 28 days after birth. Values were divided into two groups (A/B and C/D) on the basis of gestational age at delivery. Patients were excluded when their diagnosis included abruption, placenta previa, or fetal anemia, or when a blood transfusion was given. Analysis was not possible for patients <29 weeks’ gestation because virtually all these had repeated phlebotomy and erythrocyte transfusions. (From Jopling J, Henry E, Wiedmeier SE, Christensen RD. Reference ranges for hematocrit and blood hemoglobin concen- tration during the neonatal period: data from a multihospital health care system. Pediatrics. 2009;123[2]:e333–e337.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1120  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant in infants of African descent and can be associated with severe anemia and hemolysis during infancy and throughout life. There is substantial clinical and genetic overlap between HPP and HE, because infants with HPP often have a family history of HE and may develop a milder condition resem- bling HE later in childhood (see Chapter 508). In infants with significant jaundice in the first day of life without a blood type mismatch, a family history of hemolytic anemia should prompt clinical suspicion for an erythrocyte membranopathy. Beyond a negative DAT, diagnostic evaluation should include serial bilirubin and reticulo- cyte monitoring, along with a peripheral blood smear. Previously, osmotic fragility testing was the only way to establish the diagnosis, but it is signifi- cantly impacted by hemoglobin F concentrations. Some laboratories can instead diagnose certain membranopathies by flow cytometry based on binding of eosin-­5-­maleimide (EMA). Treatment is directed by the degree of anemia and hyperbilirubinemia, which can be highly variable. Erythrocyte enzymopathies can also cause neonatal anemia. Circulat- ing RBC survival relies on critical metabolic pathways to limit oxidative stress. Inadequate antioxidant systems can result in membrane instability and cell lysis that manifest clinically as hemolytic anemia. For example, G6PD is abundant in RBCs to limit oxidative stress. G6PD deficiency, the most common RBC enzymopathy, is an X-­linked disorder affecting >400 million people worldwide. Different classes of G6PD deficiency vary in clinical severity. Although affected individuals are generally asymptom- atic, some are prone to develop acute hemolytic anemia in the setting of oxidative stress triggered by sulfa drugs, infections, or certain foods like fava beans. There is an increased incidence of clinically significant jaundice in G6PD deficient neonates, who sometimes have severe and prolonged hyperbilirubinemia that can present in the first few days of life. Although severe anemia with reticulocytosis is uncommon, many infants require increased monitoring or therapy. Newborn screening for G6PD deficiency varies across the United States. G6PD activity can be tested in erythrocytes (<1–2% suggests G6PD deficiency). However, testing may be inaccurate during acute hemolysis or reticulocytosis because, for the most common variants, reticulocytes have higher enzyme activity. Another common RBC enzymopathy is pyruvate kinase deficiency (PKD), which affects an estimated 3.2-­8.5 per million individuals of Euro- pean descent. Pyruvate kinase is a critical glycolytic enzyme. In its absence, metabolic derangements can cause RBC lysis and hemolytic anemia. Though clinical severity varies, PKD may be associated with sometimes life-­threatening complications, prolonged jaundice, and lifelong blood transfusions. HEMOGLOBINOPATHIES Hemoglobinopathies result from genetic variants in γ-­globin, β-­globin, or α-­globin genes. The clinical presentation of hemoglobin variants reflects aberrant biochemical properties of the mutated hemoglobin molecule. Individuals can be anemic (most commonly), cyanotic, polycythemic, prone to hemolysis, have high methemoglobin levels, or asymptomatic. Thousands of variants have been identified, with wide-­ranging clinical severity. Hemoglobin variants can also clinically manifest at different times according to when the affected globin chain is produced (see Fig. 138.1). The common β-­hemoglobinopathies, sickle cell disease and β-­ thalassemia, do not typically present in the neonatal period due to pro- tective effects from high HbF levels. In fact, novel therapeutic approaches aim to maintain HbF persistence in sickle cell patients. In contrast, infants with rare γ-­globin variants can present with complications in the neonatal period that resolve in the first few months of life as normal gene expression changes to reduce or abrogate γ-­globin expression. Hemorrhage and Red Blood Cell Loss Blood loss or hemorrhage in utero or in the newborn period can also result in anemia. In fact, iatrogenic or pathologic blood loss is the most common cause of neonatal anemia. For critically ill and/or premature infants in the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU), laboratory monitoring can require phlebotomy of 15–30% of an infant’s blood volume every week (∼11-­22 mL/kg/week). Most other blood loss etiologies occur just before or dur- ing delivery, often from placental abruption or fetal hemorrhage (see Table 139.1). Infants can also become anemic from occult gastrointestinal blood losses due to milk protein allergy. Other causes of blood loss are restricted Hemoglobin concentration Reticulocyte count Low Congenital hypoplastic anemias Congenital infections Congenital leukemia Normal or high Coombs test Negative Positive MCV Immune hemolytic anemia • ABO • Rh • Minor blood group (e.g., Kell) • Chronic intrauterine blood loss • -Thalassemia syndromes Peripheral blood smear Normal Abnormal Rare misc. causes (e.g., hexokinase deficiency) Blood loss a) Iatrogenic (sampling) b) Fetomaternal/fetoplacental Twin to twin Internal hemorrhage c) Placental hemorrhage d) Umbilical cord hemorrhage Infection Hereditary spherocytosis Hereditary elliptocytosis Stomatocytosis Pyropoikilocytosis Pyruvate kinase deficiency G6PD deficiency DIC Low Normal or high Fig. 139.2  Diagnostic algorithm showing the approach to anemia in newborn infants. DIC, Disseminated intravascular coagulation; G6PD, glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase; MCV, mean corpuscular volume. (Modified from Blanchette VS, Zipursky A. Assessment of anemia in newborn infants. Clin Perinatol. 1984;11:489–510.) Microspherocytes hereditary spherocytosis Microspherocytes ABO hemolytic disease A B Fig. 139.3  Microspherocytes. A, Neonate with ABO hemolytic dis- ease. B, Neonate with hereditary spherocytosis. (From Christensen RD. Neonatal erythrocyte disorders. In Gleason CA, Juul SE, eds. Avery’s Diseases of the Newborn. 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018: Fig. 81-­8.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 139  u  Anemia in the Newborn Infant  1121 Table 139.2     Morphologic Abnormalities of Erythrocytes in Neonates with Jaundice ABNORMAL ERYTHROCYTE MORPHOLOGY MOST LIKELY CAUSES SUGGESTED LABORATORY TESTING/FINDINGS OTHER FEATURES Microspherocytes Hereditary spherocytosis DAT (−) EMA flow (+) Persistent spherocytosis Reticulocytosis MCHC/MCV elevated (>36, likely >40) ABO hemolytic disease DAT (+) Transient spherocytosis Reticulocytosis MCHC/MCV normal (<36, likely <34) Elliptocytes Hereditary elliptocytosis DAT (−) MCHC normal MCV normal Bite and blister cells G6PD deficiency G6PD enzyme activity Typically affects males, but rarely females are also affected Ethnicity of equatorial origin Unstable hemoglobin Heinz body preparation Echinocytes PK deficiency PK enzyme activity Autosomal recessive, likely to have no family history Other glycolytic enzyme deficiency Quantify activity of other glycolytic enzymes Schistocytes DIC and/or perinatal asphyxia Heinz body HA Low levels of FV and FVIII, elevated levels of D-­dimers Positive result of Heinz body preparation Low or falling platelet count Normal to high IPF Normal to high MPV DIC, perinatal asphyxia ADAMTS-­13 deficiency, early neonatal HUS, and giant hemangiomas all involve platelet consumption from endothelial injury and all have a similar neonatal presentation ADAMTS-­13 deficiency (TTP) Severely decreased ADAMTS-­13 activity (<0.1 U/mL) high levels of LDH Neonatal hemolytic-­uremic syndrome Acute renal failure Homozygous protein C deficiency Severely decreased functional protein C activity (<1%) Giant hemangioma May be internal or external DAT, Direct antiglobulin test; DIC, disseminated intravascular coagulation; EMA, eosin 5-­maleimide; FV, factor V; FVIII, factor VIII; G6PD, glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase; HA, hemolytic anemia; HUS, hemolytic uremic syndrome; IPF, immature platelet fraction; LDH, lactic dehydrogenase; MCHC, mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration; MCV, mean corpuscular volume; MPV, mean platelet volume; PK, pyruvate kinase; TTP, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. From Christensen RD, Yaish HM. Hemolytic disorders causing severe neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. Clin Perinatol. 2015;42:515–527. Table 3. Table 139.3     Syndromes Associated with Congenital Hyporegenerative Anemia SYNDROME PHENOTYPIC FEATURES GENOTYPIC FEATURES Adenosine deaminase deficiency Autoimmune hemolytic anemia, reduced erythrocyte adenosine deaminase activity AR, 20q13.11 Congenital dyserythropoietic anemias Type I (rare): megaloblastoid erythroid hyperplasia and nuclear chromatin bridges between nuclei Type II (most common): hereditary erythroblastic multinuclearity with positive acidified serum test result, increased lysis to anti-­I antibodies Type III: erythroblastic multinuclearity (“gigantoblasts”), macrocytosis Type I: 15q15.1-­q15.3 Type II: 20q11.2 Type III: 15q21 Diamond-­Blackfan syndrome Steroid-­responsive hypoplastic anemia, often macrocytic after 5 mo of age AR; sporadic gene variants and AD inheritance described; 19q13.2, 8p23.3-­p22 Dyskeratosis congenita Hypoproliferative anemia usually presenting between 5 and 15 yr of age X-­linked recessive, locus on Xq28; some cases with AD inheritance Fanconi syndrome Steroid-­responsive hypoplastic anemia, reticulocytopenia, some macrocytic RBCs, shortened RBC life span Cells are hypersensitive to DNA cross-­linked agents AR, multiple genes: complementation; group A 16q24.3; group B Xp22.3; group C 9q22.3; group D2 3p25.3; group E 6p22-­p21; group F 11p15; group G 9p13 Osler hemorrhagic telangiectasia syndrome Hemorrhagic anemia AD, 9q34.1 Osteopetrosis Hypoplastic anemia from marrow compression; extramedullary erythropoiesis AR, 16p13, 11q13.4-­q13.5; AD, 1p21; lethal, reduced levels of osteoclasts Pearson syndrome Hypoplastic sideroblastic anemia, marrow cell vacuolization Pleioplasmatic rearrangement of mitochondrial DNA; X-­linked or AR Peutz-­Jeghers syndrome Iron-­deficiency anemia from chronic blood loss AD, 19p13.3 ATR-­X and ATR-­16 syndromes ATR-­X: hypochromic, microcytic anemia; mild form of hemoglobin H diseaseATR-­16: more significant hemoglobin H disease and anemia are present ATR-­16, 16p13.3, deletions of α-­globin locus AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; ATR-­16, chromosome 16–related α-­thalassemia/mental retardation; ATR-­X, X-­linked α-­thalassemia/mental retardation. From Christensen RD. Neonatal erythrocyte disorders. In: Gleason CA, Juul SE, eds. Avery’s Diseases of the Newborn. 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018: Table 81-­2. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1122  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant to older children, including celiac disease or menstrual bleeding. Diagno- sis and treatment of hemorrhage in the newborn period are discussed in Chapter 142. Fetomaternal hemorrhage (FMH) is caused by abnormal bleeding from fetal to maternal circulation before or during delivery. Although small amounts of FMH can be normal, more substantial pathologic FMH (>30 mL of fetal blood) occurs in 3 per 1,000 births. In com- parison, large (>80 mL) or massive (>150 mL) FMH occurs in 0.9 and 0.2 per 1,000 births, respectively. Clinical signs of FMH vary due to differential fetal compensation. Decreased or absent fetal movement is the most common antenatal presentation and should prompt clini- cal suspicion. Postnatally, infant pallor, tachycardia, hypotension, and poor perfusion can indicate clinically significant anemia. A standard diagnostic modality for FMH is the Kleihauer-­Betke test, which leverages the differential stability of HbF vs HbA on acid expo- sure to identify fetal erythrocytes in the maternal circulation from a maternal blood smear (Fig. 139.5). However, this test requires techni- cal skill, expert interpretation, and may not be available in a timely manner. Some laboratories now offer flow cytometry–based assays to quantify fetal RBCs in maternal circulation. ANEMIA MANAGEMENT PRINCIPALS Red Blood Cell Transfusions The decision to transfuse packed RBC for anemia depends on the severity of symptoms, the hemoglobin concentration, and the pres- ence of comorbidities that can alter oxygen delivery, such as pulmo- nary hypertension, bronchopulmonary dysplasia, cyanotic congenital heart disease, or other respiratory pathology. Benefits should be bal- anced against risks, including volume overload, hemolytic and nonhe- molytic reactions, exposure to blood product preservatives and toxins, graft-­versus-­host reaction, and transfusion-­acquired infections such as CMV, HIV, parvovirus, hepatitis B, and hepatitis C (see Chapter 523). Transfusion decisions should also consider the time course in which anemia developed, whether ongoing blood loss or hemolysis are antici- pated, and if there are any planned surgical interventions. Many neonates in the NICU require RBC transfusions, particularly among premature and very low birthweight (VLBW) infants. Several tri- als to compare restrictive (lower) to liberal (higher) transfusion thresholds have shown no significant differences in death or serious morbidity, with restrictive thresholds modestly reducing blood product exposure. These studies provide the basis for neonatal transfusion guidelines based on post- natal age and respiratory support needs (Table 139.4). In full-­term anemic infants, RBC transfusions should be similarly based on hemodynamic stabil- ity, respiratory status, clinical status, and expected clinical trajectory. To reduce blood product-­associated CMV transmission to vulnerable infants, it is important that transfused RBCs are leukocyte reduced or CMV seronegative. There remains a small risk of transfusion-­associated graft versus host disease even after RBC irradiation. Although data do not support specific transfusion volumes, the typical range is from 10-­20 mL/kg. Infants at risk of volume overload, including neonates with con- genital cardiac disease or who were born in the setting of chronic abrup- tion, are typically given smaller volume transfusions (often 5 mL/kg). One logical goal of RBC transfusions is to target a specific goal hemo- globin concentration. Each 5 mL/kg of transfused RBCs is expected to raise the hemoglobin concentration by 1 g/dL. Transfusion of RBCs is typically delivered at a rate of 3-­5 mL/kg/ hr, with a slower rate preferred for very small, acutely ill infants with a tenuous fluid status. Each transfusion should be completed within 4 hours, or before a given blood product expires. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. DAT negative Pathogenesis still unclear? Osmotic fragility or ektacytometry testing Problematic neonatal jaundice? Is phototherapy needed for >2 days? To evaluate potential underlying causes, obtain blood type on mother and infant baby, DAT, CBC with peripheral blood smear, and reticulocyte count. Suspicious for HS? (MCHC/MCV >0.36) RBC enzymology or other intrinsic defect G6PD pyruvate kinase other DAT positive In ABO hemolytic disease, if the jaundice is severe or atypical, consider the possibility of a coexisting condition; consider additional diagnostic testing and sequencing. Additional diagnostic testing Hematology consultation Next-generation DNA sequencing • • • Fig. 139.4  Algorithm for the evaluation of the neonate with prob- lematic jaundice of unclear cause. Not all neonates who receive photo- therapy for 2 days or more have hemolytic jaundice. However, if hemo- lytic jaundice is suspected, this algorithm for stepwise evaluation of the cause might be useful. DAT, Direct antiglobulin test; G6PD, glucose 6-­phosphate dehydrogenase; HS, hereditary spherocytosis; MCHC, mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration; MCV, mean corpuscular volume. (From Christensen RD. Neonatal erythrocyte disorders. In Glea- son CA, Juul SE, eds. Avery’s Diseases of the Newborn. 10th ed. Phila- delphia: Elsevier; 2018: Fig. 81-­15.) Fig. 139.5  Acid elution technique of Kleihauer (Kleihauer-­Betke test). Fetal red blood cells stain with eosin and appear dark. Adult RBCs do not stain and appear as “ghosts.” (From Liley HG, Gardener G, Lopriore E, Smits-­Wintjens V. Immune hemolytic disease. In Orkin SH, Nathan DG, Ginsburg D, et al., eds. Nathan and Oski’s Hematology and Oncology of Infancy and Childhood. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015: Fig. 3-­2.) Table 139.4     Suggested Transfusion Thresholds POSTNATAL AGE PRESENCE OF RESPIRATORY SUPPORT ABSENCE OF RESPIRATORY SUPPORT HEMOGLOBIN CONCENTRATION g/dL (HEMATOCRIT %) Week 1 11.0 (33%) 10.0 (30%) Week 2 10.0 (30%) 8.5 (25%) Week 3 8.5 (25%) 7.0 (21%) Values based on thresholds described in Kirpalani H, Bell EF, Hintz SR, et al. Higher or lower hemoglobin transfusion thresholds for preterm infants. N Engl J Med. 2020;383(27):2639–2651. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 140  u  Hemolytic Disease of the Fetus and Newborn  1123 Hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn (HDFN), also known as erythroblastosis fetalis, is a broad diagnosis that applies to any fetus or neonate who develops alloimmune hemolysis caused by the trans- placental passage of maternal antibodies directed against paternally derived red blood cell (RBC) antigens. Although more than 60 differ- ent RBC antigens can elicit a maternal antibody response, clinically sig- nificant disease is most often associated with incompatibility in ABO blood groups or rhesus (Rh) antigen (Table 140.1). HDFN caused by anti-­RhD antibodies, occurring in RhD-­positive infants born to RhD-­ negative mothers, is the most severe form because of the highly immu- nogenic nature of the RhD antigen. Less frequently, hemolytic disease may be caused by differences in other Rh system antigens, or by other RBC antigens such as CW, CX, DU, K (Kell), M, Duffy, S, P, MNS, Xg, Lutheran, Diego, and Kidd. Early recognition and diagnosis facilitate timely interventions to prevent adverse sequelae. HDFN CAUSED BY Rh INCOMPATIBILITY Pathogenesis Rh antigenic determinants are genetically transmitted from each parent and determine Rh blood type by directing the production of Rh C, c, D, E, or e proteins to be expressed on the RBC surface. RhD alloimmunization is responsible for 90% of HDFN cases involving the Rh antigen system, but other Rh antigens, particularly E and c, can be causal. Rh sensitiza- tion usually occurs in the first pregnancy when small amounts of blood (usually >1 mL) enter maternal circulation so that most instances of sen- sitization occur around the time of delivery. Although sensitization may occur earlier in the first pregnancy resulting in some hemolysis, HDFN rarely occurs during a first pregnancy. After sensitization, smaller doses of antigen can stimulate antibody production, so all subsequent infants expressing the cognate antigen are at risk for HDFN. For this reason, the severity of HDFN also typically worsens with successive pregnancies. Rou- tine administration of Rh immunoglobulin (RhoGAM) to mothers at risk for Rh alloimmunization, both at 28 and 32 weeks’ gestation and within 72 hours after delivery of Rh-­positive infants, has reduced initial sensitization to an estimated <0.1% of at-­risk pregnancies in high-­income countries. Clinical Manifestations The severity of HDFN is variable, ranging from mild hemolysis without overt symptoms to severe anemia with compensatory hyperplasia of eryth- ropoietic tissues, including massive hepatosplenomegaly. When hemolysis exceeds the compensatory regenerative capacity of the hematopoietic sys- tem, profound anemia, thrombocytopenia, coagulopathy, cardiomegaly, respiratory distress, massive anasarca, and circulatory collapse can result. Perinatal hemoglobin concentrations may be as low as 3-­4 g/dL. HDFN can also cause abnormal fluid collection in two or more fetal compartments (skin, pleura, pericardium, placenta, peritoneum, amniotic fluid), a clinical scenario termed hydrops fetalis, which frequently results in significant clinical morbidity or death in utero or shortly after birth. Hydrops results from heart failure along with subsequent hepatic conges- tion and dysfunction. This leads to reduced serum albumin and loss of intravascular oncotic pressure. Consequent edema can lead to extravascu- lar fluid accumulation in the lungs (pleural effusion), abdomen (ascites), and elsewhere, which can compromise ventilation and lead to a range of life-­threatening complications (Fig. 140.1). Hydrops is typically present when the fetal hemoglobin level is <5 g/dL but can occur when hemoglo- bin levels are between 7 and 9 g/dL. Hydrops does not invariably occur with low hemoglobin concentration, instead depending on the duration of anemia and the gestational age when anemia developed. Infants affected by HDFN may not be jaundiced at birth because of effective placental clearance of lipid-­soluble unconjugated bilirubin. However, in severe cases, bilirubin pigments can stain the amniotic fluid, cord, and vernix. In either case, hyperbilirubinemia is generally evident within 24 hours of birth, as hemolysis overwhelms the infant’s bilirubin clearance system. Extremely high levels of unconjugated bilirubin levels present a risk of bilirubin encephalopathy (kernicterus), which is wors- ened in patients with concomitant hypoxia or acidosis. Hypoglycemia may further complicate clinical management of infants with severe HDFN. This may be related to islet cell hypertro- phy and hyperinsulinism due to growth stimulatory effects of anti-­RhD antibodies on the pancreas. Chapter 140 Hemolytic Disease of the Fetus and Newborn Christopher S. Thom and Michele P. Lambert Table 140.1     Etiologies of Hemolytic Disease of the Fetus and Newborn Rh ABO KELL BLOOD GROUPS Mother Rh-­negative O (occasionally B) K1-­negative Infant Rh-­positive (D is most common) A (sometimes B) K1-­positive CLINICAL FEATURES Occurrence in firstborn 5% 40–50% Rare Severity in subsequent pregnancies: Predictable Difficult to predict Somewhat predictable Stillbirth/hydrops Frequent (less with Rh-­ immunoglobulin use) Rare 10% Severe anemia Frequent Rare Frequent Jaundice Prominent, severe Mild-­moderate Mild LABORATORY TESTS Direct antiglobulin test (infant) Positive Positive or negative Positive or negative Reticulocyte count Elevated Elevated Variable RBC antibodies (mother) Usually detectable Antibody titers may help predict severity of fetal disease May not be detectable Antibody titers may not correlate with fetal disease Usually detectable Antibody titers may not correlate with fetal disease; fetus can be affected at titers lower than for Rh-­mediated hemolysis Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1124  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant Diagnosis, Prevention, and Treatment Definitive diagnosis of HDFN requires demonstration of blood group incompatibility between mother and infant, and corresponding mater- nal antibody bound to the infant’s RBCs. However, severe clinical pre- sentations strongly suggest the diagnosis. Emergent interventions may be required before definitive test results become available. During pregnancy, expectant parents should have blood tested for potential blood type incompatibility, including ABO and Rh antigens. If RhD incompatible, maternal anti-­RhD IgG titers should be mea- sured early in pregnancy. Paternal blood can be tested to determine the fetal risk of inheriting the cognate antigen, typically either 50% or 100% depending on whether the father is heterozygous or homozy- gous. However, as paternal serologic testing alone is not fully accurate, molecular genotyping may be recommended for both parents. Fetal genotyping provides an accurate prediction for the develop- ment of HDFN in sensitized mothers. Fetal Rh status is available by isolating fetal cells or cell-­free fetal DNA from the maternal circulation. These methods are replacing amniocentesis and chorionic villus sam- pling methods and associated risks. Elevated antibody titers, or rising titers, correspond to increased HDFN risk. Without Rh immunoglobulin prophylaxis, any Rh-­negative woman with a previous pregnancy or abortion, prior exposure to transfused blood products, or receipt of an organ transplant is at risk for Rh sen- sitization. If a mother has had a previously affected infant or stillbirth, the Rh-­positive infant is usually equally or more severely affected than the previous infant. Although there can be poor correlation between the anti-­RhD titer level and disease severity, Rh-­negative mothers found to have RhD antibody titers of ≥1:16 (15 IU/mL in Europe) at any time dur- ing a subsequent pregnancy warrant close monitoring for fetal anemia. Pregnancies at risk for HDFN should be managed by maternal-­fetal specialists. In some cases, monitoring must begin at 16-­24 weeks’ gesta- tion. This is typically done via noninvasive Doppler ultrasonography of middle cerebral artery (MCA) flow velocity, which can be used to moni- tor for increased vascular resistance in fetal arteries indicative of fetal anemia (Fig. 140.2). Moderate to severe anemia increases MCA blood flow, so peak MCA flow velocity can be a quantitative correlate for ane- mia severity. Real-­time ultrasound is used to detect signs of hydrops (skin or scalp edema, pleural or pericardial effusions, and ascites) and fetal heart rate monitoring. Early ultrasonographic signs of hydrops include organomegaly (liver, spleen, heart), the double–bowel wall sign (bowel edema), and placental thickening. Progression to polyhydramnios, asci- tes, pleural or pericardial effusions, and skin or scalp edema may then follow. In the setting of concerning ultrasonographic findings, percutaneous umbilical blood sampling (PUBS) can provide more direct assessment of fetal hemoglobin level and facilitate intrauterine transfusions. Although cord blood hemoglobin content typically varies in proportion to disease severity, hemoglobin may be within the normal range due to compensatory bone marrow and extramedullary hematopoiesis. Reticu- locytosis will be present and a peripheral blood smear will show polychro- masia with abundant nucleated RBCs. Thrombocytopenia may develop in severe cases. Umbilical cord bilirubin levels are generally between 3 and 5 mg/dL, including elevated direct bilirubin levels from cholestasis. Indirect-­ reacting bilirubin content rises rapidly in the first 6-­12 hours of life. Indications for delivery include fetal distress, complications during in utero interventions, and pulmonary maturity. Many affected infants are delivered preterm due to concerns for fetal well-­being, after bal- ancing risks of prematurity. The birth should be attended by a skilled neonatal resuscitation team familiar with the infant’s prenatal course. Because severe hemolytic anemia can cause rapid cardiovascular com- promise, a team skilled in evaluation in management of HDFN should be involved when the diagnosis is suspected or confirmed, especially when there is a history of prior infants affected by HDFN. Small packed RBC (PRBC) transfusions can be used to partially correct anemia, although volume expansion (e.g., large transfusions) risks worsening cardiac failure. Phototherapy may be necessary to treat hyperbilirubinemia in the first 24 hours of life if bilirubin levels exceed safe limits on an age-­ based nomogram (see Chapter 137). Although it is the indirect biliru- bin fraction that crosses the blood-­brain barrier to cause kernicterus, clinical decision-­making is often based on total serum bilirubin levels. Despite adequate resuscitation, phototherapy, and/or other empiric treatments, some infants with HDFN require exchange transfusions to treat anemia and/or hyperbilirubinemia. The decision to proceed with exchange transfusion is typically based on clinical status and trajectories in hemoglobin or serum bilirubin values, specifically the likelihood that serum bilirubin, plotted against postnatal hours of life, will reach a danger- ous level (see Chapter 137). Signs and symptoms of kernicterus are abso- lute indications for exchange transfusion. Previous kernicterus or severe HDFN in a sibling, severe reticulocytosis >15%, or prematurity (with increased kernicterus risk) are additional factors to be considered in the decision to proceed with exchange transfusion (see Chapter 137). Complications related to HDFN can also present weeks after birth, irrespective of the prenatal or perinatal course. Late anemia can present after 4-­6 weeks of life, sometimes clinically manifesting as poor feeding or growth. This can result from ongoing hemolysis caused by persistent circulating maternal alloantibodies, or from hyporegenerative anemia caused by suppression of bone marrow erythropoiesis. These etiolo- gies can be distinguished by reticulocyte count and bilirubin level, with ongoing hemolysis driving reticulocytosis and hyperbilirubinemia. Fig. 140.1  Hydrops fetalis. Longitudinal sonographic image of the fetus, with ascitic fluid outlining the liver (large arrow). The small arrow shows pleural effusion above the diaphragm. (From Wilkins I: Nonim- mune hydrops. In Creasy RK, Resnick R, Iams JD, et al., eds. Creasy & Resnik’s Maternal-­Fetal Medicine. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2014: Fig. 37-­2.) Fig. 140.2  Middle cerebral artery (MCA) Doppler study of elevated peak systolic velocity (PSV). MCA-­PSV can predict fetal anemia with suf- ficient accuracy to determine management, including the need for in- trauterine transfusion or, in the mid to late third trimester, early delivery. Fetal hemoglobin is typically measured at the start and end of intravas- cular transfusion to validate the prediction from MCA-­PSV results. The reliability of MCA-­PSV can decrease after intrauterine transfusion be- cause of the altered rheostatic characteristics of transfused adult blood. This is now the method of choice for detecting fetal anemia. (From Liley HG, Gardener G, Lopriore E, Smits-­Wintjens V. Immune hemolytic disease. In Orkin SH, Nathan DG, Ginsburg D, et al., eds. Nathan and Oski’s Hematology and Oncology of Infancy and Childhood. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier’ 2015: Fig. 3-­6.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 140  u  Hemolytic Disease of the Fetus and Newborn  1125 Neutropenia may also be observed in association with hyporegen- erative anemia. Outpatient blood and reticulocyte counts should be monitored serially under the supervision of an expert hematologist to determine the need for interventions through bone marrow recov- ery. Iron supplementation or erythropoietin therapy can be helpful. In some cases, PRBC transfusions can be required for months after birth, until the infant’s own erythropoietic system becomes more robust. Hemolysis and hyperbilirubinemia can also cause late-­onset compli- cations. Jaundice typically resolves spontaneously within a few weeks or months with conservative management. Portal vein thrombosis and portal hypertension may occur in children who have been subjected to exchange transfusion as newborn infants. This complication is thought to be seen in infants with prolonged, traumatic, or septic umbilical vein catheterization. Inspissated bile syndrome is another rare complication, associated with persistent icterus and significant elevations in both direct and indirect bili- rubin levels. The outcome for Rh-­incompatible fetuses varies greatly, depend- ing on the characteristics of both the RBC antigen and the maternal antibodies. Although fetal transfusions and prenatal interventions can ameliorate some complications, those with severe hydrops remain at risk for cerebral palsy, developmental delay, and deafness, requiring medical and procedural interventions for hydrops prenatally or after birth. Infants should be monitored closely for late complications by pediatric hematologists in the outpatient setting. HDFN CAUSED BY ABO INCOMPATIBILITY ABO incompatibility is the most common cause of HDFN, with approx- imately 20% of live births at theoretical risk. Of at-­risk infants, clinical manifestations develop in 1–10% and are usually less severe than Rh disease, rarely requiring aggressive clinical management or therapeutic intervention aside from phototherapy. This is because naturally occur- ring maternal antibodies against ABO blood group antigens are mostly IgM and therefore do not cross the placenta. However, some group O mothers will naturally produce anti-­A or anti-­B IgG antibodies that can cross the placenta to cause immune-­mediated hemolysis. For this reason, ABO incompatibility can cause hemolysis even in a firstborn infant. Another reason for mild disease manifestations is that fetal and neonatal RBCs have relatively low ABO expression, limiting binding sites for maternal antibodies. Clinical Manifestations Affected infants will typically develop jaundice in the first day of life. Severe clinical manifestations, such as hydrops, severe anemia, or hepatosplenomegaly, are rare. Diagnosis requires serologic ABO incompatibility between the mother and infant, a positive DAT, and hyperbilirubinemia with or without anemia. Affected infants often have mild anemia and reticulocytosis, with peripheral blood smears showing polychromasia, nucleated RBCs, and spherocytes. Phototherapy may be required based on bilirubin level and postnatal age, and is typically effec- tive in lowering serum bilirubin levels (see Chapter 137). In some cases, hemolysis can persist for weeks until maternal antibodies are cleared. Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) administration can help to limit hemolysis and potentially avoid exchange transfusion and/or PRBC transfusions in cases with dangerous levels of hyperbilirubinemia or anemia, respectively. Rarely, affected infants who also have hyporegen- erative anemia can require PRBC transfusions several weeks after birth. For this reason, outpatient monitoring is essential for newborns with ABO hemolytic disease. However, the persistence of hemolytic anemia or spherocytosis beyond 2 weeks of age can indicate an alternative diag- nosis, such as hereditary spherocytosis (see Fig. 139.3). OTHER ETIOLOGIES OF HDFN Incompatibility in blood group antigens other than Rh or ABO account for <5% of HDFN. Minor RBC antigen mismatch is emerg- ing as a common cause of HDFN in the developed countries in which anti-­RhD immune globulin is routinely used. The likeli- hood of minor antigen mismatches is a function of population fre- quency, antigen surface density on RBCs, and immunogenicity in the mother. In most cases, the infant’s direct antiglobulin test (DAT) will be positive and maternal serum will have alloantibodies against infant (and paternal) erythrocytes. Elution techniques can identify the antigen specificity. Common RBC antigens that can lead to clinically relevant incom- patibility include those in the Kell, Duffy, and MNS blood groups. Kell incompatibility can be the most clinically relevant, as the severity of the hemolytic anemia is difficult to predict based on previous obstetric his- tory, amniotic fluid bilirubin determinants, or maternal antibody titer (Table 140.2). Kell-­alloimmunized infants often have inappropriately low numbers of circulating reticulocytes caused by erythroid suppres- sion, and even low maternal titers of anti-­Kell antibodies may cause significant anemia due to loss of precursors expressing the antigen as well as mature erythrocytes. No pharmacologic therapies are available to prevent sensitization with these minor antigens. As with cases of Rh and ABO incompatibility, treatment is supportive, including exchange transfusion for severe presentations. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Table 140.2     Red Cell Antigens That Cause Hemolytic Disease of the Fetus and Newborn (HDFN) MILD HDFN MODERATE HDFN SEVERE HDFN ABO (A, B) Rh (EW, hrs, Tar, Rh32, HrBE, Hro) Rh (D, c, f, Ce, Cw, cE) Rh (C, e, Cx, VS, CE, Bea, JAL) Diego (Dia, Dib, Wra, ELO) Kell (K, k, Ku, Jsb) Kell (Kpa, Jsa, Ula) Duffy (Fya) Globoside (PP1Pk) Junior (Jra) Gerbich (Ge3) MNSs (Vw, Mur, MUT) Kidd (Jka, Jkb, Jk3) H (H) Mittenberger (Mia) Duffy (Fyb) Kell (K, k, Ku, Jsb) MNSs (Vw, Mur, MUT) Langereis (Lan) MNSs (U, Ss S, s, Mta, Mv) Gerbich (PP1Pk) MNSs (M, N, Hil, Or) Colton (Coa) (HJK) Colton (Cob, Co3) (Kg) — Scianna (Rd, SC2) (Sara) — Xg (Xga) — — (Ata) — — Mild HDFN, published reports of needing phototherapy for postnatal jaundice; moderate HDFN, published reports of needing postnatal exchange transfusion; severe HDFN, published reports of hydrops fetalis or intrauterine transfusions. Note that some antigens have no system as per International Society of Blood Transfusion classification. From Jackson ME, Baker JM. Hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn. Clin Lab Med. 2021;41:133–151. Table 1. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1126  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant Neonatal polycythemia is broadly defined as an elevated hemoglobin or hematocrit level. This can be due to primary myeloproliferative disorders (e.g., polycythemia vera) or reactive processes, such as from chronic hypoxemia or living at high altitudes. In infants, polycythemia is inferred from a hematocrit level >2 standard deviations above the normal value for gestational and postnatal age (Figs. 138.2 and 139.1). Full-­term infants are therefore considered polycythemic with a hemoglobin level above ∼22 g/dL or hematocrit >65%. It is impor- tant that these values are obtained from a “central” venous or arterial punc- ture, as heelstick or capillary samples can report artificially elevated values. Due to fluid shifts in the newborn period, hematocrit levels typically peak at 2-­3 hours of life. Although most polycythemic individuals are asymptomatic, symp- tomatic blood hyperviscosity from polycythemia can cause sluggish blood flow that decreases tissue perfusion and leads to metabolic dis- turbances. Signs and symptoms are vague, including irritability, lethargy, tachypnea, respiratory distress, cyanosis, feeding disturbances, hyper- bilirubinemia, hypoglycemia, and thrombocytopenia. Thus a high index of suspicion is often required for diagnosis and coincident respiratory, cardiovascular, and neurologic disorders should be investigated. Severe complications include seizures, stroke, pulmonary hypertension, nec- rotizing enterocolitis (NEC), renal vein thrombosis, and renal failure in newborns. Related symptoms often appear in the first hours of life but can be delayed by up to 2-­3 days depending on clinical context. Dehydration should be considered as a potential contributing cause in symptomatic polycythemic infants. Neonatal polycythemia can also result from processes that lead to passive RBC transfusion into the fetus or increased intrauterine erythropoiesis. Passive fetal RBC transfusions may occur from prolonged delayed umbilical cord clamping but can also present in recipients of twin-­twin transfusions or unrecognized maternal-­fetal transfusions from the placenta. Most cases of increased fetal erythropoiesis are thought to result from chronic intrauterine hypoxia, which stimulates erythropoietin and RBC production. Increased fetal erythropoiesis is associated with polycythemia in postterm (3%) and term (1–2%) infants; small-­for-­ gestational-­age (8%) or large-­for-­gestational-­age (3%) infants; infants of diabetic mothers; infants of hypertensive mothers or those taking propranolol; and infants with trisomy 13, 18, or 21, adrenogenital syndrome, neonatal Graves disease, hypothyroidism, or Beckwith-­ Wiedemann syndrome. Delayed cord clamping does not increase the incidence of polycythemia. Contraindications to delayed cord clamp- ing include suspected chronic intrauterine hypoxia (e.g., severe growth restriction) and maternal diabetes, which independently increase RBC production. The frequency of neonatal polycythemia is also increased for births at higher altitudes (5% at high altitude vs 1–2% at sea level). Asymptomatic polycythemia can be treated conservatively, with consid- eration for supplemental enteral or intravenous hydration. Treatment for symptomatic infants should also begin with supplemental hydration, after considering potential comorbidities (e.g., heart failure). All polycythemic infants should have intake and output, blood glucose, and bilirubin levels followed closely. Infants with hyperviscosity symptoms may benefit from partial exchange transfusions, particularly if the hematocrit reaches ≥75% and symptoms worsen despite aggressive intravenous hydration. Outcomes are more closely determined by etiologies contributing to chronic intrauterine hypoxia than polycythemia per se. Although infants treated with partial exchange transfusion may be at increased risk of NEC, it is unclear whether adverse long-­term speech, fine motor, cognitive, and behavioral outcomes are affected. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Chapter 141 Neonatal Polycythemia Christopher S. Thom and Michele P. Lambert Congenital and acquired bleeding disorders can manifest at vary- ing times in infants and older children. Hemorrhage in an otherwise healthy newborn may suggest an inherited coagulation defect (e.g., hemophilia) or concurrent thrombocytopenia. Bleeding in otherwise sick neonates is frequently caused by underproduction or consump- tion of coagulation factors and/or platelets. Common acquired hem- orrhagic disorders include hemorrhage due to vitamin K deficiency (see Chapter 71 and below), disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC: see Chapter 532), or immune-­mediated thrombocytopenia (see Chapter 533). The neonatal hemostatic system differs from older children and adults. This impacts bleeding risk and laboratory assessment, and should enter into management considerations. Plasma levels of vita- min K–dependent coagulation factors (II, VII, IX, X, protein C, pro- tein S) and antithrombin are initially low at birth and do not reach adult ranges until approximately 6 months of age. Note that overall the neonatal hemostatic system tends toward hypercoagulability, given low levels of protein C, protein S, and antithrombin. This may explain why neonatal platelets are hypofunctional in response to some ago- nists, and why neonatal platelet content differs from adults (Chapters 525 and 526). HEMORRHAGIC DISEASE OF THE NEWBORN Bleeding from vitamin K deficiency, otherwise known as hemorrhagic disease of the newborn, results from transient but profound deficien- cies in vitamin K–dependent coagulation factors. Vitamin K normally facilitates carboxylation of factors II, VII, IX, and X, which is necessary for enzymatic activities. Decarboxylated factors are biologically inac- tive. Without vitamin K, decarboxylated proteins induced in vitamin K absence (PIVKA) are secreted. The classic form of this disease can be prevented with intramuscular injection of vitamin K (phytonadione) just after birth. The disease process most often affects exclusively breastfed infants who did not receive intramuscular vitamin K prophylaxis at birth. Maternal breastmilk lacks free vitamin K, and newborns lack the intes- tinal flora normally responsible for vitamin K synthesis. Premature infants with nutritional deficiencies are also at risk of vitamin K defi- ciency and bleeding. Laboratory testing typically reveals prolonged prothrombin time (PT) and partial thromboplastin time (PTT) in affected infants, with low plasma levels of prothrombin (II) and factors VII, IX, and X. Soluble PIVKA measurement can also act as a laboratory marker for vitamin K status. Factors V and VIII, fibrinogen, bleeding time, clot retraction, platelet count, and platelet function will be within normal newborn ranges. Intramuscular administration of 1 mg vitamin K1 (phytonadi- one) soon after birth can prevent bleeding complications from vitamin K deficiency in most full-­term infants. Low birthweight infants may be given 0.5 mg phytonadione, although weight-­ based dosing varies between institutions. Phytonadione is the only form of vitamin K available in the United States. Vitamin K2, also known as menaquinones, constitutes a minority of the vitamin K consumed by humans or produced by intestinal flora. Vitamin K prophylaxis does not prevent all hemorrhagic disease of the new- born. Although rare, cases can occur in full-­term infants, preterm infants with significant nutritional deficiencies, and infants with malabsorption. Chapter 142 Hemorrhage in the Newborn Infant Christopher S. Thom and Michele P. Lambert Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1126  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant Neonatal polycythemia is broadly defined as an elevated hemoglobin or hematocrit level. This can be due to primary myeloproliferative disorders (e.g., polycythemia vera) or reactive processes, such as from chronic hypoxemia or living at high altitudes. In infants, polycythemia is inferred from a hematocrit level >2 standard deviations above the normal value for gestational and postnatal age (Figs. 138.2 and 139.1). Full-­term infants are therefore considered polycythemic with a hemoglobin level above ∼22 g/dL or hematocrit >65%. It is impor- tant that these values are obtained from a “central” venous or arterial punc- ture, as heelstick or capillary samples can report artificially elevated values. Due to fluid shifts in the newborn period, hematocrit levels typically peak at 2-­3 hours of life. Although most polycythemic individuals are asymptomatic, symp- tomatic blood hyperviscosity from polycythemia can cause sluggish blood flow that decreases tissue perfusion and leads to metabolic dis- turbances. Signs and symptoms are vague, including irritability, lethargy, tachypnea, respiratory distress, cyanosis, feeding disturbances, hyper- bilirubinemia, hypoglycemia, and thrombocytopenia. Thus a high index of suspicion is often required for diagnosis and coincident respiratory, cardiovascular, and neurologic disorders should be investigated. Severe complications include seizures, stroke, pulmonary hypertension, nec- rotizing enterocolitis (NEC), renal vein thrombosis, and renal failure in newborns. Related symptoms often appear in the first hours of life but can be delayed by up to 2-­3 days depending on clinical context. Dehydration should be considered as a potential contributing cause in symptomatic polycythemic infants. Neonatal polycythemia can also result from processes that lead to passive RBC transfusion into the fetus or increased intrauterine erythropoiesis. Passive fetal RBC transfusions may occur from prolonged delayed umbilical cord clamping but can also present in recipients of twin-­twin transfusions or unrecognized maternal-­fetal transfusions from the placenta. Most cases of increased fetal erythropoiesis are thought to result from chronic intrauterine hypoxia, which stimulates erythropoietin and RBC production. Increased fetal erythropoiesis is associated with polycythemia in postterm (3%) and term (1–2%) infants; small-­for-­ gestational-­age (8%) or large-­for-­gestational-­age (3%) infants; infants of diabetic mothers; infants of hypertensive mothers or those taking propranolol; and infants with trisomy 13, 18, or 21, adrenogenital syndrome, neonatal Graves disease, hypothyroidism, or Beckwith-­ Wiedemann syndrome. Delayed cord clamping does not increase the incidence of polycythemia. Contraindications to delayed cord clamp- ing include suspected chronic intrauterine hypoxia (e.g., severe growth restriction) and maternal diabetes, which independently increase RBC production. The frequency of neonatal polycythemia is also increased for births at higher altitudes (5% at high altitude vs 1–2% at sea level). Asymptomatic polycythemia can be treated conservatively, with consid- eration for supplemental enteral or intravenous hydration. Treatment for symptomatic infants should also begin with supplemental hydration, after considering potential comorbidities (e.g., heart failure). All polycythemic infants should have intake and output, blood glucose, and bilirubin levels followed closely. Infants with hyperviscosity symptoms may benefit from partial exchange transfusions, particularly if the hematocrit reaches ≥75% and symptoms worsen despite aggressive intravenous hydration. Outcomes are more closely determined by etiologies contributing to chronic intrauterine hypoxia than polycythemia per se. Although infants treated with partial exchange transfusion may be at increased risk of NEC, it is unclear whether adverse long-­term speech, fine motor, cognitive, and behavioral outcomes are affected. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Chapter 141 Neonatal Polycythemia Christopher S. Thom and Michele P. Lambert Congenital and acquired bleeding disorders can manifest at vary- ing times in infants and older children. Hemorrhage in an otherwise healthy newborn may suggest an inherited coagulation defect (e.g., hemophilia) or concurrent thrombocytopenia. Bleeding in otherwise sick neonates is frequently caused by underproduction or consump- tion of coagulation factors and/or platelets. Common acquired hem- orrhagic disorders include hemorrhage due to vitamin K deficiency (see Chapter 71 and below), disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC: see Chapter 532), or immune-­mediated thrombocytopenia (see Chapter 533). The neonatal hemostatic system differs from older children and adults. This impacts bleeding risk and laboratory assessment, and should enter into management considerations. Plasma levels of vita- min K–dependent coagulation factors (II, VII, IX, X, protein C, pro- tein S) and antithrombin are initially low at birth and do not reach adult ranges until approximately 6 months of age. Note that overall the neonatal hemostatic system tends toward hypercoagulability, given low levels of protein C, protein S, and antithrombin. This may explain why neonatal platelets are hypofunctional in response to some ago- nists, and why neonatal platelet content differs from adults (Chapters 525 and 526). HEMORRHAGIC DISEASE OF THE NEWBORN Bleeding from vitamin K deficiency, otherwise known as hemorrhagic disease of the newborn, results from transient but profound deficien- cies in vitamin K–dependent coagulation factors. Vitamin K normally facilitates carboxylation of factors II, VII, IX, and X, which is necessary for enzymatic activities. Decarboxylated factors are biologically inac- tive. Without vitamin K, decarboxylated proteins induced in vitamin K absence (PIVKA) are secreted. The classic form of this disease can be prevented with intramuscular injection of vitamin K (phytonadione) just after birth. The disease process most often affects exclusively breastfed infants who did not receive intramuscular vitamin K prophylaxis at birth. Maternal breastmilk lacks free vitamin K, and newborns lack the intes- tinal flora normally responsible for vitamin K synthesis. Premature infants with nutritional deficiencies are also at risk of vitamin K defi- ciency and bleeding. Laboratory testing typically reveals prolonged prothrombin time (PT) and partial thromboplastin time (PTT) in affected infants, with low plasma levels of prothrombin (II) and factors VII, IX, and X. Soluble PIVKA measurement can also act as a laboratory marker for vitamin K status. Factors V and VIII, fibrinogen, bleeding time, clot retraction, platelet count, and platelet function will be within normal newborn ranges. Intramuscular administration of 1 mg vitamin K1 (phytonadi- one) soon after birth can prevent bleeding complications from vitamin K deficiency in most full-­term infants. Low birthweight infants may be given 0.5 mg phytonadione, although weight-­ based dosing varies between institutions. Phytonadione is the only form of vitamin K available in the United States. Vitamin K2, also known as menaquinones, constitutes a minority of the vitamin K consumed by humans or produced by intestinal flora. Vitamin K prophylaxis does not prevent all hemorrhagic disease of the new- born. Although rare, cases can occur in full-­term infants, preterm infants with significant nutritional deficiencies, and infants with malabsorption. Chapter 142 Hemorrhage in the Newborn Infant Christopher S. Thom and Michele P. Lambert Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 142  u  Hemorrhage in the Newborn Infant  1127 Infants who present with hemorrhage should be given 1-­5 mg of vita- min K1 intravenously, typically on 3 consecutive days. This regimen gen- erally improves coagulation defects and bleeding ceases within hours. Serious bleeding, particularly in premature infants or those with liver disease, may also require intravenous transfusion of fresh-­frozen plasma to correct coagulopathy. Packed RBCs (PRBCs) or whole blood transfusions may also be required to correct anemia. Bleeding episodes most frequently occur between days of life 2 and 7. Mild bleeding may precede more severe manifestations, which are most frequently gastrointestinal, nasal, subgaleal, intracranial, or occur after circumcision. Early-­onset vitamin K deficiency bleeding can occur in the first day of life in infants born to mothers chronically treated with drugs that interfere with vitamin K absorption or function, including warfarin, phenytoin, phenobarbital, or some cholesterol-­lowering medications. Usually, bleeding is promptly ameliorated by vitamin K administra- tion, although some infants can have poor or delayed improvements in bleeding. Thus infants born to mothers who took these medications late in gestation should be given 1-­2 mg intravenous vitamin K imme- diately after birth, and serial newborn PT monitoring should begin using cord blood. If the PT is greatly prolonged and fails to improve, or significant hemorrhage presents, fresh-­frozen plasma administration can temporarily correct factor deficiencies. Late-­onset vitamin K deficiency bleeding after 2 weeks of life is most often associated with conditions that cause fat-­soluble vitamin malabsorption, including cystic fibrosis, neonatal hepatitis, or biliary atresia (Table 142.1). Bleeding can be severe and is not responsive to vitamin K treatment if there is hepatocellular injury; bleeding will respond to intravenous vitamin K if there is malabsorption. Bleeding unresponsive to vitamin K should prompt consideration for congenital clotting factor deficiencies (see Chapter 525). These conditions may present with hematomas, melena, post circumcision bleeding, or bleeding from the umbilicus. Up to 70% cases of hemo- philia (factor VIII or IX deficiency) are clinically apparent in the new- born period. Congenital factor deficiency treatment requires specific factor replacement, or fresh-­frozen plasma if factor concentrate is not available. Although oral vitamin K administration has been investigated as an alternative to intramuscular prophylaxis, oral regimens do not prevent late-­onset vitamin K deficiency bleeding. Thus intramuscular vitamin K prophylaxis remains the method of choice. Prompt recognition of infants who do present with bleeding from vitamin K deficiency is critical. A presumptive diagnosis can often be made based on a complete history, even before laboratory confirma- tion, facilitating rapid treatment initiation. With timely therapy and supportive care, the associated mortality rate is low. DISSEMINATED INTRAVASCULAR COAGULOPATHY Critical illness that results in consumption of circulating coagulation factors and platelets is termed disseminated intravascular coagulation. In neonates and other patients, DIC can result in either bleeding or thrombosis. DIC occurs secondary to an array of primary processes, including but not limited to sepsis or asphyxia. Rarely, hemangiomas will cause consumption of coagulation factors and initiate this process. In addition to clinical context, coagulation studies, factor levels, and platelet counts can provide evidence of ongoing DIC. Management centers on treatment of the underlying etiology, although supportive care may include blood, plasma, vitamin K, or platelet transfusions to replace consumed factors. Usually, affected infants are critically ill, with evidence of end-­organ damage. Those with DIC can have high rates of morbidity and mortality, dependent on the underlying etiology (see Chapter 532). Diagnosis and Treatment Diagnostic modalities for hemorrhage in neonates vary based on clini- cal suspicion. For example, noninvasive imaging can be used to iden- tify hemorrhage or bleeding sequelae. Premature infants who become acutely anemic out of proportion to phlebotomy are frequently moni- tored for intraventricular hemorrhage or investigated for bleeding else- where. These diagnostic measures can help to explain the pathology leading to anemia and any related risks. In turn, diagnosis can facilitate prognostication, and in rare cases lead to potentially definitive inter- ventions (e.g., for some vascular malformations). Treatment for blood loss typically includes transfusion of cross-­ matched PRBCs, which should be given more slowly in the setting of chronic blood loss or in patients at risk of volume overload. Ther- apies and interventions should also focus on correcting coexisting coagulopathy and/or comorbidities that increase further bleeding risk. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Table 142.1     Vitamin K Deficiency Bleeding (Hemorrhagic Disease of the Newborn) EARLY-­ONSET DISEASE CLASSIC DISEASE LATE-­ONSET DISEASE Age 0-­24 hr 2-­7 days 1-­6 mo Potential sites of hemorrhage Cephalohematoma Gastrointestinal Intracranial Subgaleal Ear-­nose-­throat-­mucosal Gastrointestinal Intracranial Intracranial Cutaneous Gastrointestinal Post circumcision Ear-­nose-­throat-­mucosal Umbilicus Cutaneous Injection sites Intraabdominal Injection sites Thoracic Etiology/risks Maternal drugs (phenobarbital, phenytoin, warfarin, rifampin, isoniazid) that interfere with vitamin K levels or absorption Vitamin K deficiency Exclusive breastfeeding Cholestasis: malabsorption of vitamin K (biliary atresia, cystic fibrosis, hepatitis) Inherited coagulopathy Abetalipoprotein deficiency Idiopathic in Asian breastfed infants Warfarin ingestion Prevention Avoidance of high-­risk medication Possibly antenatal vitamin K to treatment of mother (20 mg) before birth and postnatal administration to infant soon after birth Prevented by parenteral vitamin K at birth Oral vitamin K regimens require repeated dosing Prevented by parenteral and high-­ dose oral vitamin K during periods of malabsorption or cholestasis Incidence Very rare ∼2% if infant not given vitamin K soon after birth Dependent on primary disease Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1128  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant Nonimmune hydrops, a significant contributor to neonatal morbidity and mortality, is the leading cause of fetal hydrops. Hydrops fetalis is defined by ≥2 abnormal fetal fluid collections, such as ascites, pleural, pericardial, or cutaneous edema (>5 mm) (Fig. 143.1). In addition, there may be associated placental edema (>6 mm), polyhydramnios (50%), and the rare occurrence of mirror syndrome, in which the mother becomes edematous. In cases in which hydrops is not caused by red cell alloimmunization, it is referred to as nonimmune hydrops. Non- immune hydrops is the result of a range of underlying etiologies, such as high-­output cardiac failure secondary to anemia or fetal arrhythmia, alterations in lymphatic development, fetal inflammation, and capil- lary leak or elevated central venous pressure due to structural cardiac disease. Despite advances in recognition of the underlying cause, mor- tality remains high with prognosis dependent on the underlying cause, degree of prematurity, and extent of disease burden at birth. INCIDENCE AND ETIOLOGY Estimates of incidence range between 1 in 1,700 pregnancies and 1 in 4,000 pregnancies. Population studies provide lower estimates, but this may be an underrepresentation due to a lack of information on fetuses who died in utero. The etiologies are broad; cardiovascular, lymphatic, hematologic, and chromosomal disorders are the most common identifiable underlying causes (Table 143.1). The etiology is unknown in approximately 10–20% of cases. However, improved understanding of the lymphatic system and its contribution to the development of nonimmune hydrops has led to increased identification of the underlying etiology. Lymphatic causes of nonimmune hydrops are congenital lymphovenous atresia, in which the thoracic duct outlet is not connected to the venous circulation, and com- plete absence of the thoracic duct or pulmonary lymphatic perfusion syn- drome, in which the pulmonary lymphatic channels abnormally conduct to the pleural space resulting in chylothorax. Other mechanisms for the development of nonimmune hydrops are not well established (Fig. 143.2). PRENATAL DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT Hydrops fetalis is identified in utero by ultrasonographic find- ings of excess fluid. After ruling out immune-­mediated hydrops (Rh alloimmunization), other diagnostic testing may include screen- ing for hemoglobinopathies, testing for fetal-­maternal hemorrhage (Kleihauer-­Betke test), and testing for infection (i.e., TORCH infec- tions, syphilis, and parvovirus B19). Fetal echocardiography should be performed to assess for structural heart defect or arrhythmia. Com- monly diagnosed causes of nonimmune hydrops in fetuses greater than 24 weeks’ gestation are cardiac disorders. Amniotic fluid can be obtained for fetal genetic testing to evaluate for chromosomal and spe- cific gene abnormalities. In cases with fetal pleural effusions, a fluid sample may be collected via thoracentesis and tested for lymphocyte count to determine whether the underlying cause of hydrops is due to lymphatic dysfunction. In utero treatment has been successful for fetal supraventricular tachycardia (SVT), twin-­twin transfusion syndrome, nonimmune fetal anemias, large vascular masses, congenital diaphragmatic hernia, and other chest occupying lesions, such as congenital cystic adenoma- toid malformation (CCAM) and pulmonary sequestration. In cases in which initial ultrasound is not useful in identifying a cause, repeat ultrasound or fetal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can be used to reassess fetal anatomy, monitor progression of hydrops, determine an underlying diagnosis, and direct fetal intervention. The finding of nutmeg lung on fetal MRI signifies abnormal pulmonary lymphatic flow that results in chylothorax. To treat fetal pleural effusions, in the absence of an infectious etiology, fetal thoracentesis and/or thora- coamniotic shunt placement can be performed. POSTNATAL DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT Postnatal therapy includes a team approach to the delivery room management that often requires immediate endotracheal tube intuba- tion for predicted respiratory failure secondary to pleural, peritoneal, or pericardial effusions, pulmonary hypoplasia, surfactant deficiency, pulmonary edema, or poor chest wall compliance due to soft tissue edema. Immediate transfusion of packed red blood cells (RBCs) may also be required in the delivery room in the presence of anemias. Drainage of large pleural, peritoneal, or pericardial effusions may aid in achieving effective mechanical ventilation and ensure successful resuscitation. High ventilatory pressures may be needed to overcome poor chest compliance but may result in pneumothoraces or pul- monary interstitial emphysema, especially in cases with pulmonary hypoplasia. Once the infant is stabilized, additional intensive care includes fluid and electrolyte management. Maintenance fluids should be restricted as much as possible with the goal of resolving or improving the degree of hydrops. In cases with ongoing drainage of pleural or peritoneal fluid, fluid replacement may be necessary to replete serum sodium lev- els and maintain hemodynamic stability. If the fluid drained is second- ary to a lymphatic disorder, albumin may need to be administered to maintain adequate serum levels. Diagnostic testing should be performed if an underlying etiology of hydrops is unknown at the time of birth to direct additional therapies. Whole exome (or genome) sequencing and microarray duplication/ deletion studies are recommended to establish a diagnosis. Analysis of fluid from the pericardial, pleural, or peritoneal space may confirm an underlying lymphatic disorder if there is a lymphocyte predomi- nance. Hypoalbuminemia and the presence of soft tissue edema is also suggestive of a lymphatic disorder. Additional evaluation of the lym- phatic system includes the use of T2 weighted MRI, dynamic contrast-­ enhanced magnetic resonance lymphangiogram (DCMRL), and direct or conventional lymphangiogram. Interventions for congenital lym- phatic disorders include ethiodized oil injection to treat pulmonary lymphatic perfusion syndrome and lymphovenous anastomosis for lymphovenous atresia. OUTCOMES Mortality from nonimmune hydrops remains high at approximately 50% despite recent advances in diagnosis and treatment. Predictors of survival include gestational age at birth and degree of illness at the time of birth. Infants with parvovirus, isolated neonatal chylothorax, and SVT have the highest survival. Chapter 143 Nonimmune Hydrops Dalal Taha Fig. 143.1  Hydrops fetalis. Longitudinal sonographic image of the fetus, with ascitic fluid outlining the liver (large arrow). The small arrow shows pleural effusion above the diaphragm. (From Wilkins I. Nonim- mune hydrops. In Creasy RK, Resnick R, Iams JD, et al., eds. Creasy & Resnik’s Maternal-­Fetal Medicine, 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2014: Fig. 37-­2.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 143  u  Nonimmune Hydrops  1129 Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Table 143.1     Principal Diagnoses Associated with Nonimmune Hydrops Fetalis CARDIOVASCULAR (21%) THORACIC/EXTRATHORACIC MASS/LYMPHATIC (12.4%) HEMATOLOGIC (10.4%) STRUCTURAL • Hypoplasias (left or right heart) • AV canal defect • Single ventricle • Transposition of great arteries • Septal defects (VSD/ASD) • Tetralogy of Fallot • Ebstein anomaly • Ductus arteriosus closure • Truncus arteriosus • Valvular (stenosis/insufficiency) ARRYTHMIAS • Atrial (flutter/tachyarrhythmia) • Wolff-­Parkinson-­White • Supraventricular tachycardia • Long QT interval • Heart block CARDIOMYOPATHY • Tumors • Neoplasias • Myopathies • Cardiosplenic syndromes • Hereditary cardiomyopathies INFECTION (6.7%) • Cytomegalovirus • Parvovirus B19 • Syphilis • Herpes simplex • Rubella • Coxsackievirus • Leptospirosis • Trypanosoma cruzi INBORN STORAGE DISEASE (1.1%) • Gaucher disease • GM1 gangliosidosis • Sialidosis • MPS IVA and VII • Mucolipidosis type I+II • Galactosialidosis • Niemann-­Pick type C TTTS-­PLACENTAL (5.6%) Twin • TTTS • Acardiac twin Placental • Umbilical vein thrombosis • Umbilical cord angiomyxoma • True cord knot • Chorionic vein thrombosis • Rare placenta disorders Mass Effect • Diaphragmatic hernia • Congenital pulmonary adenomatoid malformation • Intrathoracic mass • Pulmonary sequestration • Chylothorax • Airway obstruction • Pulmonary lymphangiectasia • Bronchogenic cyst Other • Milroy syndrome • Generalized lymphatic dysplasia • Lymphedema-­distichiasis syndrome Skeletal Dysplasias • Thanatophoric dysplasia • Short rib polydactyly • Hypophosphatasia • Osteogenesis imperfecta chondrogenesis • Campomelic dysplasia • Lethal achondroplasia • Nager syndrome IDIOPATHIC (17.8%) CHROMOSOMAL (13.4%) TRISOMY • 21 • 18 • 13 MONOSOMY • 45, X • 45, X (mosaic) DUPLICATIONS • 18 q + • 11p DELETIONS • 13 q − • 17 q − TRIPLOIDY • Alpha-­thalassemia • Hereditary stomatocytosis • Fetomaternal hemorrhage • Glucose-­6-­phosphate deficiency • Leukemia • Pyruvate kinase deficiency • Red blood cell aplasias • Diamond-­Blackfan syndrome GASTROINTESTINAL (0.5%) • Duodenal atresia • Duodenal diverticulum • Jejunoileal atresia • Volvulus • Imperforate anus • Meconium peritonitis • Intestinal malrotation • Intestinal duplication • Hepatic fibrosis • Cholestasis • Biliary atresia • Hepatic vascular malformations • Hepatitis • Hepatic necrosis • Liver tumor or cysts SYNDROMIC/MISCELLANEOUS (8.1%) • Noonan syndrome and other RASopathies • Arthrogryposis • Multiple pterygium syndrome • Neu-­Laxova syndrome • Pena-­Shokeir syndrome • Myotonic dystrophy • Saldino-­Noonan syndrome • Francois syndrome, type III • Familial nuchal bleb • Elejalde syndrome • Thoracoabdominal syndrome URINARY TRACT MALFORMATION (2.3%) • Urethral stenosis • Urethral atresia • Posterior urethral valve • Finnish type nephrosis • Edwards (prune belly) syndrome OTHER • HLH • IPEX • Nemaline myopathy • Multiple pterygium syndrome • Hyper IgE syndrome ASD, Atrial septal defect; AV, arteriovenous; HLH, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis; IPEX, immune dysregulation polyendocrinopathy enteropathy X-­linked, MPS, mucopolysaccharide; TTTS, twin-­twin transfusion syndrome; VSD, ventricular septal defect. Modified from Martin RJ, Fanaroff AA, Walsh MC, eds. Fanaroff & Martin’s Neonatal-­Perinatal Medicine Diseases of the Fetus and Infant, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020: Table 23.4, p 381. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1130  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant Various associated malformations Chromosomal syndrome Cardiovascular disorders Renal disorders Placental disorders Twinning Disturbed neurologic functioning Hypotonia or hypomobility decreased movements chest wall Increased intrathoracic pressure Obstruction venous flow Possible Possible Increased interstitial fluid accumulation NIHF Increased central venous pressure Cystic adenomatoid malformation Extralobar sequestration Mediastinal teratoma Skeletal dysplasia Congestive heart failure Volume overload Fluid accumulation Imbalance interstitial fluid production Receptor Hyperviscosity reduced perfusion Increased oxygen extraction redistribution blood flow increased cardiac output Liver failure Possible Lymphatic dysplasia Reduced lymph flow Low plasma oncotic pressure Protein-losing enteropathy Donor Anemia Hematologic disorders Infections Inborn errors of metabolism Gastrointestinal disorders Hypoxia Cardiac failure increased umbilical venous pressure Decreased cardiac output Obstructed outflow diverted blood flow abnormal venous return abnormal ventricular filling decreased inotropic force reversed blood flow in IVC Fig. 143.2  Impact of various etiologies for nonimmune hydrops on fluid homeostasis. IVC, Inferior vena cava; NIHF, nonimmune hydrops fe- talis. (Adapted from Bellini C, Hennekam RCM. Non-­immune hydrops fetalis: a short review of etiology and pathophysiology. Am J Med Genet. 2012;158A:597–605.) The umbilical cord typically consists of two umbilical arteries, the umbili- cal vein, and a gelatinous substance called Wharton jelly, all contained within a sheath derived from the amnion and coiled into a helical shape. The muscular umbilical arteries carry deoxygenated blood from the fetus to the placenta and are contiguous with the fetal internal iliac arteries. The umbilical vein carries oxygenated blood from the placenta back to the fetus, where it flows into the inferior vena cava by way of the ductus veno- sus. The placenta contains an estimated 20 mL/kg of blood; current recom- mendations are to delay clamping of the cord at delivery for 30-­60 seconds in both term and preterm infants, to facilitate placental transfusion. At term, a normal umbilical cord is approximately 55 cm long. Abnormally short cords are associated with conditions causing decreased fetal move- ment, including fetal hypotonia, oligohydramnios, and uterine constraint, and lead to increased risk for complications during labor and delivery for both mother and infant. Long cords (>70 cm) increase the risk for true knots, wrapping around the fetus, and/or prolapse. Straight uncoiled cords are associated with anomalies, fetal distress, and intrauterine fetal demise. When the cord is cut after birth, portions of these structures remain in the base but gradually become obliterated. The blood vessels are function- ally closed but anatomically patent for 10-­20 days. The umbilical arteries become the lateral umbilical ligaments; the umbilical vein, the ligamentum teres; and the ductus venosus, the ligamentum venosum. The umbilical cord stump usually sloughs within 2 weeks. Delayed separation of the cord, after more than 1 month, has been associated with neutrophil chemotactic defects and overwhelming bacterial infection (see Chapter 168). A single umbilical artery is present in approximately 5-­10/1,000 births; the frequency is higher (35-­70/1,000) in twin births. It is estimated that 20–30% of infants with a single umbilical artery have other (and often mul- tiple) congenital structural abnormalities. The presence of multiple anom- alies is suggestive of an abnormal karyotype, including trisomies. Infants with an isolated single umbilical artery are not thought to be at increased risk of having a chromosomal anomaly, and no specific evaluation is indi- cated for these infants aside from a thorough physical examination. The omphalomesenteric duct (OMD) is an embryonic connection between the developing midgut and the primitive yolk sac. It typically involutes at 8-­9 weeks’ gestation, but failure of this process can leave an abnormal connection between the umbilical cord and the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. The most common remnant of the OMD is a Meckel diverticu- lum (see Chapter 377), whereas abnormalities that would become symp- tomatic in the neonatal period include a sinus or fistula that would drain mucus or intestinal contents through the umbilicus. An umbilical polyp is one of the least common OMD remnants and represents exposed GI mucosa at the umbilical stump. The tissue of the polyp is bright red, firm, and has a mucoid secretion. Therapy for all OMD remnants is surgical excision of the anomaly. A persistent urachus (urachal cyst, sinus, patent urachus, or diverticu- lum) is a result of failure of closure of the allantoic duct and may be asso- ciated with bladder outlet obstruction. Patency should be suspected if a clear, light-­yellow, urine-­like fluid is being discharged from the umbilicus. Symptoms include drainage, a mass or cyst, abdominal pain, local ery- thema, and infection. Urachal anomalies should be investigated by ultra- sonography and a cystogram. Therapy for a persistent urachus is surgical excision of the anomaly and correction of any bladder outlet obstruction if present. Chapter 144 The Umbilicus Eric C. Eichenwald Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 144  u  The Umbilicus  1131 UMBILICAL HEMORRHAGE Hemorrhage from the umbilical cord may be the result of trauma, inad- equate ligation of the cord, or failure of normal thrombus formation. It may also indicate hemorrhagic disease of the newborn or other coagu- lopathies (especially factor XIII deficiency), septicemia, or local infec- tion. The infant should be observed frequently during the first few days of life so that if hemorrhage does occur, it will be detected promptly. UMBILICAL GRANULOMA The umbilical cord stump usually dries and separates within 1-­2 weeks after birth. The raw surface becomes covered by a thin layer of skin; scar tissue forms, and the wound is usually healed within 12-­15 days. The pres- ence of saprophytic organisms delays separation of the cord and increases the possibility of invasion by pathogenic organisms. Mild infection or incomplete epithelialization may result in a moist, granulating area at the base of the cord with a slight mucoid or mucopurulent discharge. Good results are usually obtained by cleansing with alcohol several times daily. Persistence of granulation tissue at the base of the umbilicus is com- mon. The tissue is soft, 3-­10 mm in size, vascular and granular, colored dull red or pink, and may have a seropurulent discharge. Granulation tissue is treated by cauterization with silver nitrate, repeated at intervals of several days until the base is dry. UMBILICAL INFECTIONS The devitalized umbilical cord provides an ideal medium for bacterial growth and a potential portal of entry for microbes. The term omphalitis refers to infection of the umbilical cord stump, navel, or the surrounding abdominal wall. Omphalitis must be distinguished from local irritation from the umbilical cord clamp. Erythema that extends to the abdominal wall, particularly tracking superiorly is concerning. Most term infants with mild localized omphalitis appear well and are afebrile. However, ∼10–15% are acutely ill and at risk for bacteremia, spreading cellu- litis, necrotizing fasciitis, and extension into the portal vein and liver. Necrotizing fasciitis (which is often polymicrobial) is associated with a high mortality rate and is often associated wth neutropenia. Treatment of omphalitis includes prompt antibiotic therapy with agents effective against Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia coli, such as an antistaphy- lococcal penicillin or vancomycin in combination with an aminoglyco- side. If abscess formation or necrotizing fasciitis has occurred, surgical consultation for incision and drainage or debridement may be required. In community and primary care settings in developing countries, topical application of chlorhexidine to the umbilical cord has been shown to reduce omphalitis and neonatal mortality. In hospital settings in developed countries, there is no convincing evidence that application of antiseptics (including triple dye, alcohol, or chlorhexidine) is superior to dry cord care in minimizing the risk of omphalitis for infants in these settings, although these treatments do reduce bacterial colonization. UMBILICAL HERNIA Often associated with diastasis recti, an umbilical hernia is caused by incomplete closure or weakness of the muscular umbilical ring. Predispos- ing factors include Black race and low birthweight. The hernia appears as a soft swelling covered by skin that protrudes during crying, coughing, or straining and can be reduced easily through the fibrous ring at the umbi- licus. The hernia consists of omentum or portions of the small intestine. The size of the defect varies from <1 cm in diameter to as much as 5 cm (2 inches), but larger defects are rare. Most umbilical hernias that appear before age 6 months disappear spontaneously by 1 year. Even large hernias (5-­6 cm in all dimensions) have been known to disappear spontaneously by 5-­6 years. Strangulation of intestinal contents is extremely rare. Surgery is not advised unless the hernia persists to age 4-­5 years, causes symptoms, becomes strangulated, or becomes progressively larger after age 1-­2 years. Defects exceeding 2 cm are less likely to close spontaneously. CONGENITAL OMPHALOCELE An omphalocele is a herniation or protrusion of the abdominal contents into the base of the umbilical cord (Fig. 144.1). In con- trast to the more common umbilical hernia, the sac is covered with peritoneum without overlying skin, and the insertion of the distal umbilical cord into the sac itself distinguishes this condition from other abdominal wall defects such as gastroschisis. The size of the sac that lies outside the abdominal cavity depends on its contents. Herniation of intestines into the cord occurs in approximately 1/5,000 births, and herniation of liver and intestines in 1/10,000 births. The abdominal cavity may be proportionately small because of the lack of space-­occupying viscera. Treatment for an omphalo- cele consists of covering the sac with moist, sterile dressings, then initiating prompt surgical repair if the abdomen is able to accom- modate the eviscerated organs. If the omphalocele is too large to allow immediate repair, continued dressings may temporize and encourage epithelialization of the sac. Occasionally, mesh or similar synthetic material may be used to cover the viscera if the sac has ruptured or if excessive mobilization of the tissues would be neces- sary to cover the mass and its intact sac. Many infants with omphalocele (50–70%) have associated mal- formations, and about 30% have chromosomal abnormalities. The likelihood of an abnormal karyotype is increased when the liver is intracorporeal (not within the sac). Omphalocele can be part of well-­ defined syndromes, including Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome, characterized by omphalocele, macrosomia, and hypoglycemia. The survival rate for affected infants is largely determined by the pres- ence of associated malformations or chromosomal abnormalities. For patients with isolated omphalocele, the survival rate is >90%. UMBILICAL TUMORS Tumors of the umbilicus are rare and include angioma, enterotera- toma, dermoid cyst, myxosarcoma, and cysts of urachal or OMD remnants. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. A B Fig. 144.1  A, Omphalocele with umbilical cord insertion into the sac and intestine visible. B, Omphalocele with sac containing liver. (Cour- tesy Dr. Foong Lim, Cincinnati Fetal Center at Cincinnati Children’s Hos- pital Medical Center.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1132  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant Neonatal abstinence syndrome (NAS) is a drug withdrawal syndrome that occurs among some substance-­exposed infants shortly after birth. The syndrome most commonly occurs after in utero exposure to opi- oids and is also called neonatal opioid withdrawal syndrome (NOWS). Between 2000 and 2017, the rate of NAS in the United States increased sixfold reaching 7.2 per 1,000 hospital births, which mirrors the rise of other population-­wide opioid-­related complications including over- dose deaths. The opioid overdose crisis in the United States was first driven by prescription opioids (e.g., oxycontin), then heroin, and more currently by illicitly produced fentanyl. For pregnant women opioid use disorder (OUD), or continued use of an opioid despite adverse conse- quences, often begins before pregnancy and is associated with myriad social risks including trauma and physical abuse. Treatment of OUD, especially with medications for OUD (MOUD), is effective in improv- ing pregnancy outcomes. MOUD, including buprenorphine and meth- adone, has been shown to reduce risk of relapse, overdose death, HIV and hepatitis C virus (HCV), and preterm birth. Methadone is a full μ-­ opioid agonist, generally given once daily, and is administered through highly regulated opioid treatment programs. Buprenorphine is a par- tial μ-­opioid agonist and a partial k-­antagonist, can be prescribed in the outpatient setting, and is more widely available. Accessing treatment can be challenging for pregnant women, with studies showing they are nearly 20% less likely to be accepted for treatment than nonpregnant women. Notably, MOUD such as methadone and buprenorphine can cause NAS; however, this is generally thought of as a preferable out- come when compared to preterm birth or overdose. The clinical signs of NAS are generally associated with neurologic (e.g., tremor), gastrointestinal (e.g., poor feeding), and autonomic signs (e.g., tachypnea) and can be documented using the NAS score (Fig. 145.1) as well as the Eat, Sleep, Console (ESC) assessment tool (Table 145.1). Chapter 145 Neonatal Abstinence Syndrome Stephen W. Patrick Date: System Signs & Symptoms Excessive High Pitched Cry Continuous High Pitched Cry Central Nervous System Disturbances Metabolic / Vasomotor / Respiratory Disturbances Gastrointestinal Disturbances Sleeps < 1 Hour After Feeding Sleeps < 2 Hours After Feeding Sleeps < 3 Hours After Feeding Hyperactive Moro Reflex Markedly Hyperactive Moro Reflex Mild Tremors Disturbed Moderate - Severe Tremors Disturbed Mild Tremors Undisturbed Moderate - Severe Tremors Undisturbed Increased Muscle Tone Excoriation (Specific Area) Myoclonic Jerks Generalized Convulsions Sweating Fever < 101° F (37.2° - 38.2° C) Fever ≥ 101.1° F (≥38.4° C) Frequent Yawning ( > 3 - 4 Times/Interval) Mottling Nasal Stuffiness Sneezing ( > 3 - 4 Times/Interval) Nasal Flaring Respiratory Rate - 60/min Respiratory Rate - 60/min with Retractions Excessive Sucking Poor Feeding Regurgitation Projectile Vomiting Loose Stools Watery Stools TOTAL SCORE Initials of Scorer 2 2 1 3 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 3 3 3 3 3 5 4 3 Score Time Weight: AM PM Comments NEONATAL ABSTINENCE SCORE Fig. 145.1  Data from Amin A, Frazie M, Thompson S, Patel A. Assessing the Eat, Sleep, Console model for neonatal abstinence syndrome man- agement at a regional referral center. J Perinatol. 2023 Apr 25:1–7; Blount T, Painter A, Freeman E, et al. Reduction in length of stay and morphine use for NAS with the “Eat, Sleep, Console” Method. Hosp Pediatr. 2019;9:615–623; Glait M, Moyer A, Saudek K, et al. Addressing drivers of health- care utilization for neonatal opioid withdrawal syndrome. J Perinatol. 2023;43):392–401; Grossman M. Eat, Sleep, Console (ECS) care tool. 2017 ESC 3rd ed. 1.30.20; Young LW, Ounpraseuth ST, Merhar SL, et al. Eat, sleep, console approach or usual care for neonatal opioid withdrawal. N Engl J Med. 2023;388:2326–2336.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 145  u  Neonatal Abstinence Syndrome  1133 The timing of NAS onset can be related to several factors, including the last maternal use and half-­life of the opioid. NAS signs can rarely begin within 24 hours of birth but more commonly occur within 48 hours after short-­acting opioids, and 72-­96 hours after exposure to long-­acting or maintenance opioids (e.g., methadone). For these reasons, it is rec- ommended to observe opioid-­exposed infants for at least 3 days after birth for an infant exposed to short-­acting opioids and 5 days for longer half-­life opioids such as buprenorphine. Tremors, poor feeding, exces- sive crying, poor sleeping, and hyperirritability are the most prominent signs of NAS. Other signs include sneezing, yawning, hiccups, myoclonic jerks, skin breakdown and abrasions, vomiting, loose stools, nasal stuffi- ness, and seizures. Many prenatal and postnatal factors can influence the severity and duration of withdrawal. Polysubstance use, particularly with cigarettes, gabapentin, benzodiazepines, and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, has been associated with a higher risk or more severe NAS, whereas breastfeeding after delivery, rooming-­in, and standardizing care processes (i.e., following protocols) have been associated with lower risk or less severe NAS (see Table 145.1 for nonpharmacologic interventions). Identifying substance use as early as possible in pregnancy is critical to improving pregnancy outcomes. For that reason, it is recommended to perform universal screening for substance use using a standardized and validated tool such as the four Ps: • Parents: Did any of your parents have problems with alcohol or other drug use? • Partner: Does your partner have a problem with alcohol or drug use? • Past: In the past, have you had difficulties in your life because of alcohol or other drugs, including prescription medications? • Present: In the past month, have you drunk any alcohol or used other drugs? Screening can be augmented with toxicology testing of the mother or infant; it is important to recognize that toxicology testing has limitations and for some substances may only capture a short win- dow of exposure. Toxicology testing of pregnant women requires informed consent but is not needed for infants if done as part of routine care. Testing urine of mothers or infants can capture recent expo- sures, whereas umbilical cord and meconium testing will capture a longer window of substance use. Toxicology testing may not be needed if women are in treatment and receive routine testing in pregnancy. TREATMENT AND SETTING Hospitals should have standardized protocols for the observa- tion, scoring, and treatment of the opioid-­exposed infant. The first line of treatment for all opioid-­exposed infants is nonpharmaco- logic support, including rooming-­in, breastfeeding, and tailoring the environment to not overstimulate the infant. Importantly, care for opioid-­exposed infants and those diagnosed with NAS does not require admission to a neonatal intensive care unit (NICU); admis- sion to a NICU may cause undue separation of the maternal–infant dyad as well as exacerbate clinical signs of withdrawal by placing the infant in a loud environment. Breastfeeding, in addition to its well-­ documented benefits, can also reduce NAS severity and can safely occur with maternal treatment using MOUD. Although there are no evidence-­based guidelines, consensus guidelines suggest breastfeed- ing can be encouraged if there has been no relapse within 30 days of birth and should be encouraged if there has been no relapse within 90 days of birth. Untreated HIV is a contraindication to breastfeeding; however, breastfeeding is safe with HCV unless there are cracked or bleeding nipples. The decision for pharmacologic treatment has been traditionally based on the nursing scoring assessment tool, and the most widely used tool is a modification of the Finnegan scoring tool (see Fig. 145.1). Other scoring tools include the Neonatal Narcotic With- drawal Index, Neonatal Withdrawal Inventory, and MOTHER NAS Scale. The ESC model is very useful and is an evidenced-based approach for improved outcomes and fewer pharmacologic interventions (Table 145.1). An inability to eat, sleep, or be consoled in at least two of the three parameters in the presence of nonpharmacologic interventions warrants pharmacologic therapy, usually with oral liquid morphine plus continued nonpharmacologic interventions. Other etiologies of poor eating, sleeping, and consolability must be evaluated. The main objectives when initiating pharmacologic treatment is to control clini- cal signs of withdrawal and to prevent adverse events (e.g., seizure). Excessive weight loss may be an indication for pharmacotherapy regardless of other clinical signs. Pharmacologic treatment for NAS, when necessary, should be done with an opioid, and the most commonly used are morphine or metha- done (Table 145.2). Morphine is a short-­acting opioid given every 3 hours as a weight-­based or clinical sign-­based regimen. Methadone is a long-­acting opioid that can generally be given twice a day after loading doses. Buprenorphine is an effective agent that may be supe- rior to morphine; its use may be associated with a short duration of treatment and length of stay, as well as few adverse effects and less use of additional medications. Clinical trials have shown methadone and buprenorphine to decrease length of treatment when compared with morphine. Buprenorphine and some methadone formulations con- tain high ethanol levels, which may be deleterious to the infant and should be avoided. Closely adhering to NAS treatment protocols with guidelines on initiation and weaning have been shown to decrease both length of treatment and length of stay. Adjuvant therapy is generally initiated in the unusual situation when the primary opioid is not effective in controlling the signs of NAS. The two medications used as adjuvant therapy are phenobarbi- tal and clonidine. American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) guidelines suggest clonidine be used as adjuvant therapy; phenobarbital should be avoided if possible as some studies suggest long-­term use can be associ- ated with developmental delay. Long-­term studies of opioid-­exposed infants are lacking, and many are confounded by co-­exposures (e.g., alcohol), maternal health (e.g., poor nutrition), or social risk (e.g., trauma), all of which could influ- ence developmental outcomes. Still, infants should be closely moni- tored to optimize developmental trajectory. In many states a diagnosis of NAS qualifies for early intervention services, which are part of the Individuals with Disability and Education Act Part C, and infants should be referred to this service. Other supportive referrals should be Table 145.1     Eat, Sleep, Console (ESC) Assessment Approach to Neonatal Opioid Withdrawl EATS Takes > 10 min to coordinate feeding with hunger cues < 10 min for breastfeeds < 10 mL of a feed SLEEPS < 1 hr after a feed CONSOLES Takes > 10 min to be consoled Cannot stay consoled for 10 min Nonpharmacologic interventions include rooming in, caregiver presence, skin to skin contact, holding/cuddling, safe swaddling (avoid face), feed on demand after hunger cues, breastfeeding, non-nutritive sucking, quiet low stimulation low-light environment, rhythmic motion, additional caregiver support, minimal disruptions in environment, cluster care to awake times, safe sleep, caregiver self-care and rest. These parameters suggest withdrawl. Data from Amin A, Frazie M, Thompson S, Patel A. Assessing the Eat, Sleep, Console model for neonatal abstinence syndrome management at a regional referral center. J Perinatol. 2023 Apr 25:1–7; Blount T, Painter A, Freeman E, et al. Reduction in length of stay and morphine use for NAS with the “Eat, Sleep, Console” Method. Hosp Pediatr. 2019;9:615–623; Glait M, Moyer A, Saudek K, et  al. Addressing drivers of healthcare utilization for neonatal opioid withdrawal syndrome. J Perinatol. 2023;43):392–401; Grossman M. Eat, Sleep, Console (ECS) care tool. 2017 ESC 3rd ed. 1.30.20; Young LW, Ounpraseuth ST, Merhar SL, et al. Eat, sleep, console approach or usual care for neonatal opioid withdrawal. N Engl J Med. 2023;388:2326–2336. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1134  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant Table 145.2     Medications Used in Pharmacologic Treatment of Neonatal Abstinence Syndrome DRUG INITIAL DOSING DOSING INCREASES WEANING SCHEDULE ADD ADJUVANT THERAPY Morphine 0.05 mg/kg/dose q3h Increase dose 10–20% 10% of stabilizing dose q24h >1 mg/kg/day of morphine Unable to wean for 2 days Methadone 0.1 mg/kg/dose q6h for 4 doses Increase to q4h if unable to capture 0.7 mg/kg/dose q12h × 2 doses, then 0.05 mg/kg/dose q12h × 2 0.04 mg/kg/dose q12h × 2 0.03 mg/kg/dose q12h × 2 0.02 mg/kg/dose q12h × 2 0.01 mg/kg/dose q12h × 2 0.01 mg/kg/dose q24h × 1 Unable to wean for 2 days Buprenorphine 4 μg/kg q8h 2 μg/kg until maximum of 15 μg/kg 3 μg/kg/dose q8h × 3 doses 2 μg/kg/dose q8h × 3 2 μg/kg/dose q8h × 2 2 μg/kg/dose q24h × 1 Unable to wean for 2 days Phenobarbital 20 mg/kg — 5 mg/kg daily N/A Clonidine 1.5 μg/kg/dose q3h 25% dose escalation q24h 10% every day N/A N/A, Not available; q24h, every 24 hours. considered, including home visitation programs and Early Head Start. Further, in the discharge process clinicians should also assess other risk, including HIV and HCV exposure, which must be followed in the outpatient setting. Hospitals should standardize the discharge pro- cess for opioid-­exposed infants to ensure connection to postdischarge services. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Alcohol is a known teratogen that can cause irreversible central nervous system (CNS) damage. Injury can include reduced brain volume, particularly for the frontal lobe, and thinning of the cor- pus callosum. These injuries can lead to CNS dysfunction that can range from relatively mild to severe. Prenatal alcohol exposure (PAE) affects all stages of brain development from neurogenesis to myelination, through mechanisms that include disrupted cell-­cell interactions, altered gene expression, and oxidative stress leading to abnormalities such as reduced brain volume in the frontal lobe, striatum and caudate nucleus, thalamus, and cerebellum; thin- ning of the corpus callosum; and abnormal functioning of the amygdala. PAE can result in a spectrum of outcomes. The term fetal alco- hol spectrum disorder (FASD) is the umbrella term that encom- passes a group of conditions associated with PAE. The FASD group of disorders includes fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS), partial fetal alcohol syndrome (pFAS), alcohol-­related neurodevelopmen- tal disorder (ARND), alcohol-­related birth defect (ARBD), and neurobehavioral disorder associated with prenatal alcohol expo- sure (ND-­PAE). Chapter 146 Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder Susan A. Friedman and Hallam Hurt EPIDEMIOLOGY According to the CDC, approximately 1 in 7 pregnant women report consuming alcohol within the past 30 days. Approximately 20-30% report drinking at some point during the pregnancy, and more than 5% report binge drinking. consuming alcohol within the last 30 days, with ∼20% reporting binge drinking. Because almost 50% of pregnancies in the United States are unplanned, unintentional PAE can occur before a woman knows she is pregnant. PREVALENCE FASDs are the most common causes of preventable developmen- tal delay and intellectual disability. Prevalence rates vary across reports. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) FAS Surveillance Network reported prevalence rate across several populations of 0.3 out of 1,000 children from 7 to 9 years of age. This prevalence rate is much lower than that obtained by active case ascertainment studies in the United States and Western Europe, which have estimated prevalence rates of 2–5%. Another study reported similar rates, 24-­48 cases per 1,000 children (2.4–4.8%) for all FASDs, and 6-­9 cases per 1,000 (0.6–0.9%) for FAS specifically. Studies that have examined PAE by anonymous meconium testing demonstrate 4.26 times greater identification of alcohol use dur- ing pregnancy compared with maternal self-­report. Rates of FASDs have been reported to be higher in children living in poverty, in Indigenous populations, and in children living in foster care. The rate of FASDs for children in foster care has been found to be 10 to 15 times higher than that for children in the general popula- tion. FASDs often go undetected in these children, and as many as 86.5% of foster and adopted youth with FASDs go undiagnosed or are diagnosed incorrectly within the FASD spectrum. Children adopted internationally represent another high-­risk group, particu- larly those adopted from Eastern Europe. Children adopted from orphanages and other children with a history of early trauma, such as those in foster care, may also exhibit symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and other neurobehavioral and develop- mental issues that can overlap with those of FASD, including those without physical features (ARND or ND-­PAE). The impairments seen in children with an FASD may also include the negative impact of additional prenatal and postnatal risk factors. DIAGNOSTIC SYSTEMS The most widely used diagnostic guidelines are the Hoyme FASD diagnostic guidelines (revised 2016), the University of Washington 4-­Digit Diagnostic Code (2004), the CDCFAS guidelines (revised Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 146  u  Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder  1135 2004, only includes FAS), and the Canadian FASD guidelines (revised 2016). These FASD diagnostic guidelines overlap but also have impor- tant distinctions. The Hoyme system uses more stringent alco- hol exposure criteria than the 4-Digit Diagnostic Code. Both the Hoyme system (2016), and the 4-Digit Diagnostic Code system use the three diagnostic criteria of facial findings, growth restric- tion, and CNS abnormalities and both include a spectrum of dis- orders under the umbrella term of fetal alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD). However, they do differ in diagnostic tools, specific crite- ria used to define each category, and in diagnostic nomenclature. The result of these differences and others is that there may not be total agreement between the two in the diagnosis of a given patient. The CDC guidelines establish criteria only for FAS and require the three diagnostic criteria of facial findings, growth restriction, and CNS abnormalities, with or without documented PAE. In the updated Canadian guidelines, “fetal alcohol spectrum disorder” is considered a diagnostic term with two categories: FASD with senti- nel facial features and FASD without sentinel facial features. These guidelines eliminate growth restriction as a required diagnostic cri- terion. They include an at-risk category for children with confirmed PAE who were too young to meet the criteria for neurodevelop- mental deficits, or in whom assessment was incomplete. They also include a category for children with cardinal facial features without documentation or evidence of severe impairment in neurodevelop- mental domains. There is no universal acceptance of one system. If less stringent criteria are used, the sensitivity increases, which may lead to overdiagnosis. Additional expert evaluation is then needed to confirm a diagnosis. In contrast, using more stringent criteria leads to greater specificity but may underdiagnose FASD. Historical and Clinical Features The historical and clinical features shared by all previously described diagnostic systems (although not required by all of the disorders) include five categories: (1) PAE, (2) three key facial features, (3) pre- natal/postnatal growth restriction, (4) deficient brain growth and/or significant structural brain abnormalities, and (5) neurobehavioral impairment. Prenatal Alcohol Exposure A safe threshold or pattern of alcohol consumption during preg- nancy has not been identified, and any PAE at any stage of gestation is believed to present a risk to a developing fetus. Significant alcohol exposure has been carefully defined in the 2016 updated Hoyme guide- lines as follows. One or more of the following exposures, beginning 3 months before pregnancy and continuing until delivery, with a standard drink defined as 1.5 oz of hard liquor, 5 oz of wine, or 12 oz of beer or wine cooler: • ≥6 drinks/week for ≥2 weeks during pregnancy • ≥3 drinks per occasion on ≥2 occasions • Documented alcohol-­related social or legal problems before or dur- ing pregnancy or a history of treatment for an alcohol-­related condi- tion • Documentation of intoxication of blood, breath, or urine alcohol testing • Positive testing with an established biomarker of alcohol exposure during pregnancy or at birth • Positive finding on a validated screening tool for drinking during pregnancy Information can be obtained from a variety of sources in addition to the birth mother, including family members, foster or adoptive par- ents, social service agencies who observed maternal alcohol consump- tion during pregnancy, or medical records that document PAE, alcohol treatment, or social, legal, or medical problems related to drinking during pregnancy. Binge drinking (4 or more drinks per occasion) has been shown to be the most harmful to fetal development. PAE in the first trimester leads to the classic facial dysmorphia associated with FAS and other structural defects. PAE can have other deleterious effects (e.g., spontaneous abortion, growth defect, CNS effects) on the fetus throughout the pregnancy. Several well-­validated screens are used to identify alcohol use in pregnant and nonpregnant women of childbearing years, including the assessments of Tolerance, Annoyance, Cut Down, Eye-­Opener (T-­ ACE), Cut Back, Annoyed, Guilty, Eye-­Opener (CAGE); Car; Relax; Alone; Forget; Friends; Trouble (CRAFFT); Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (Audit-­C); and Tolerance, Worried, Eye-­Opener, Amnesia, Kut Down (TWEAK). There are, however, no well-­validated screens designed to ask about past consumption of alcohol. Pediatri- cians can ask the following two questions to determine the likelihood of significant PAE: “In the 3 months before you knew you were preg- nant, how many times did you have 4 or more alcohol drinks in a day?” and “During your pregnancy, how many times did you have any alco- hol?” If a positive response is given to either question, the clinician can follow up to determine the level of PAE by asking the following: (1) “During your pregnancy, on average, how many days per week did you have any alcohol?”; (2) “During your pregnancy, on a typical day when you had an alcoholic beverage, how many drinks did you have?”; and (3) “During your pregnancy, what was the maximum number of drinks that you had in a day?” Dysmorphologic Facial Features The three key, facial dysmorphologic features include short palpe- bral fissures, a thin vermilion border of the upper lip, and a smooth philtrum (Fig. 146.1). Measurement of the palpebral fissure length (PFL) is shown in Figure 146.2. There are several different PFL charts that can be used to plot this measurement. That of Hall is included here (Fig. 146.3), with additional charts listed under Additional Resources for Healthcare Providers. In addition, differ- ent diagnostic systems have different cutoffs to define the criteria. Evaluation of the philtrum and upper lip utilizes the Lip-­Philtrum A B C D Fig. 146.1  Examples of facial features of FAS in children of different ethnicities. A, White. B, Native American. C, Black. D, Asian. (Copyright 2021 Susan (Astley) Hemingway PhD, University of Washington.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1136  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant en ex Fig. 146.2  The palpebral fissure length is defined by the distance between the endocanthion (en) and exocanthion (ex) landmarks. (Copy- right 2021 Susan (Astley) Hemingway PhD, University of Washington.) Age from birth (years) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 Palpebral fissure length (mm) 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 +2SD +1SD Mean –1SD –2SD +2SD +1SD Mean –1SD –2SD Inches Fig. 146.3  Palpebral fissure measurements. (From Hall JG, Froster-­ Iskenius UG, Allanson J, eds. Handbook of Normal Physical Measure- ments. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 1989: p. 150.) Guide developed at the University of Washington (Fig. 146.4), which can be obtained on request in digital format or as a lami- nated card from the University of Washington. Although this guide includes norms for White and Black children, additional work is needed on establishing norms for the three facial features across a wider range of racial groups. Additional minor anomalies may also occur in association with PAE but are not included in the diagnostic criteria: mid-­face hypoplasia, epicanthal folds, ptosis, strabismus, altered palmar crease (“hockey stick” and clinodactyly of the fifth finger [Fig. 146.5], “railroad track ears” [Fig. 146.6], hypoplastic nails, limited elbow supination, campto- dactyly, hypertrichosis). Prenatal/Postnatal Growth Deficiency This is defined as ≤10th percentile for age (Hoyme and CDC) or ≤3rd percentile (4-­Digit Diagnostic Code) for either height or weight. The systems also vary in the timing of the growth problems (prenatal/at birth, or at any point in life). Deficient Brain Growth and Significant Structural Brain Abnormalities Deficient brain growth is defined as an occipitofrontal head circumfer- ence (OFC) <10% for age, abnormal morphogenesis, or abnormal neu- rophysiology. The criteria additionally state that if the child has weight and height <10th percentile, then the OFC should be at or below the 3rd percentile. Structural brain abnormalities seen on brain imaging may include abnormalities of the corpus callosum, the cerebellum, or basal ganglia. Neurobehavioral/Neurodevelopmental Impairment These criteria can include abnormal findings on neurologic exam or seizures, and/or functional neurobehavioral or neurodevelopmen- tal abnormalities. There is tremendous variability in the presentation of the neurobehavioral and neurocognitive features of children with FASD due to the timing and amount of PAE and unique characteristics of the birth mother and the child. The assessment of neurobehavioral impairment is also different for children under 3 years of age than for children 3 years or older. The degree of developmental impairment can range from relatively mild delays to severe intellectual disability, although approximately 75% of individuals with an FASD do not have intellectual disability. In infants, the symptoms can be nonspecific and may include irritability, poor feeding, sleep difficulties, a tendency to become easily overstimu- lated, or difficulty forming attachments with caregivers. Young children may demonstrate developmental delays, inattention, impulsivity, inter- nalizing and externalizing problems, social impairments and difficulty with peers, and behavioral difficulties such as mood lability, frequent tantrums, or aggression. The neurocognitive profile of children with an FASD that emerges at elementary or middle school age includes challenges with processing speed, memory, visual-­spatial reasoning, math, auditory comprehension, use of pragmatic language, and execu- tive functioning skills. In adolescents, difficulties with abstract reason- ing, time and money management, and social and adaptive skills may become more pronounced. The most common comorbid mental health condition seen in chil- dren with an FASD is attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD; see Chapter 50), which occurs in >50% of children. Individuals with FASD may also present with problems of self-­regulation, impulse con- trol, and adaptive functioning. Additional mental health disorders typ- ically seen in children and adolescents include oppositional defiant and conduct disorder, anxiety disorder, adjustment disorder, sleep disorder, mood disorders (e.g., depression, bipolar disorder), and disinhibited social engagement disorder. FASD may increase the severity or com- plexity of these conditions. DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA Five diagnoses included under the FASD umbrella include the following: 1.	Fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS) 2.	Partial fetal alcohol syndrome (pFAS) 3.	Alcohol related neurodevelopmental disorder (ARND) 4.	Neurobehavioral disorder associated with prenatal alcohol exposure (ND-­PAE) 5.	Alcohol related birth defects (ARBD) The previously described clinical features with or without a history PAE are used to define the disorders within the FASD spectrum (Tables 146.1-­146.5). As noted earlier, the criteria do vary somewhat depend- ing upon which diagnostic system is used. DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS It is important to consider other causes of the facial features of FAS and pFAS, as each of these can be seen in certain genetic and teratogenic exposure conditions. Genetic conditions can include Williams syndrome, Dubowitz syndrome, Noonan syndrome, 22q11.2 deletion (velocardiofa- cial syndrome), Cornelia de Lange syndrome, chromosome 15q duplica- tion syndrome, and others. Teratogenic exposure conditions include fetal valproate syndrome, fetal hydantoin syndrome, maternal phenylketonuria Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 146  u  Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder  1137 (PKU) effects, toluene embryopathy, and others. Therefore a genetics eval- uation may be warranted, especially when there is unconfirmed PAE. The neurobehavioral issues associated with FASD can be difficult to distinguish from those of other behavioral health disorders, such as autism spectrum disorder, ADHD, intellectual disability, reactive attachment disorder, PTSD, exposure to other maternal substance use during pregnancy, and others. This is particularly the case when the FASD facial features are not present. Children who experience “adverse childhood experiences” (ACEs), such as neglect, abuse, poverty, and parental substance abuse, can have similar findings of hyperactivity, poor impulse control, emotional dysregulation, deficits in executive function, and memory weaknesses as children with FASD. Further- more, these disorders are not mutually exclusive and more than one underlying disorder can result in the neurobehavioral issues found. OUTCOMES Children with an FASD are at higher risk for victimization and bul- lying, often due to poor social judgment. Children and adolescents who are not identified early and treated aggressively are significantly more likely to have secondary disabilities, including encounters with juvenile justice and incarceration, substance abuse problems, severe mental health problems, sexual promiscuity and other inap- propriate sexual behaviors, high rates of school failure, dropout and under-­ or unemployment, health problems, and premature death. Children and adolescents with an FASD have a 95% lifetime likeli- hood of having a mental health diagnosis and are at higher risk for suicide. Although an FASD cannot be cured, the long-­term negative effects of the brain injury caused by PAE can be reduced through aggressive, sustained intervention initiated early. Factors associated with a better outcome include early diagnosis (under age 6 years), a stable and nurturing home, lack of exposure to violence, full assessment for disabilities and adequate provision of appropriate education, therapies, and social services. Prevention of FASD and early identification and interventions for children with an FASD is essential and has become an important goal of the CDC and other organizations. Lip-Philtrum Guide 1 For use as a digital image on a smartphone or tablet. Printing invalidates Guide. Square ensures length by width ratio of image is correct. For use as a digital image on a smartphone or tablet. Printing invalidates Guide. Square ensures length by width ratio of image is correct. Philtrum Guide Lip-Philtrum Guide 2 Philtrum Guide FASD 4-Digit Diagnostic Code © 2014 Susan Astley, University of Washington fasdpn.org 5 4 3 2 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 3 3 3 4 4 4 5 5 5 A B Fig. 146.4  University of Washington Lip-­Philtrum Guides 1 (A) and 2 (B) are used to rank upper lip thinness and philtrum smoothness. The philtrum is the vertical groove between the nose and upper lip. The guides reflect the full range of lip thickness and philtrum depth with Rank 3 representing the population mean. Ranks 4 and 5 reflect the thin lip and smooth philtrum that characterize the FAS facial phenotype. Guide 1 is used for Whites and all other races with lips like Whites. Guide 2 is used for Blacks and all other races with lips like Blacks. Free digital images of these guides for use on smartphones are available from astley@uw.edu. (Copyright 2021 Susan (Astley) Hemingway PhD, University of Washington.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1138  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant INTERVENTIONS AND TREATMENTS Given the heterogeneity of presenting problems associated with the FASDs, interventions need to be tailored to address each individual child’s or adolescent’s profile of strengths and difficulties. Studies sup- port that the most successful interventions begin early and continue across the life span, include a preventive focus, are intensive and indi- vidualized, address multiple domains of functioning, include parent education and training, and are coordinated across systems of care. Behavioral issues seen in children with FASD can be difficult for parents to manage and can cause significant stress within the home. These children often have impaired cause-­and-­effect understand- ing and therefore may not respond to traditional behavior modifica- tion strategies. Pediatricians can help support families by providing parenting tips suggested by the CDC, such as providing a structured environment and stable routines, using simple concrete language and lots of repetition, viewing the difficult behaviors as brain based rather than willful misbehavior, focusing on strengths, and providing an abundance of positive reinforcement. Specific programs include Families Moving Forward and Parents and Children Together teach- ing parents strategies designed to improve self-­regulation and execu- tive function, and decreasing child behavior problems. Children with FASD often have significant difficulties with social functioning, such as interpreting social cues and communicating in social settings. Pro- grams such as Children’s Friendship Training provides group-­based, parent-­assisted intervention that teaches social skills, which have been shown to improve standardized rating of social skills. Programs such as Good Buddies provide classes that address issues related to impaired social skills. Children with FASD may have decreased safety awareness, poor judgement, and impulsivity, which can place them at increased risk for unintentional injuries. A video-­based intervention, Fire and Street Safety, was developed to address this. Children who participated showed significant improvement in safety-­related knowledge and appropriate behavioral responses following the training and were also able to apply this training to real-­world situations. Young children with FASD are generally eligible for early interven- tion therapies (occupational therapy, physical therapy, speech therapy, and developmental instruction) and should be referred for these ser- vices as needed. Older children with an FASD often have difficulties with verbal and spatial learning, executive functioning, adaptive skills, social skills and peer relations, and mental health, which can interfere with academic performance. High rates of school failure and disrup- tion are reported for this population. Difficulties with memory often require simplification of instructions, repetition, and patience. A home and school environment that is structured and predictable can also help to address this issue. To enhance generalizability of skills and to ensure they are encoded into memory, children with an FASD require con- sistent and predictable interventions, simplified directions, repeated instructions, and reduced distractions in the classroom. Classroom intervention programs such as Cognitive Control Therapy have been found to result in significant improvements in classroom behavior and academic achievement. Programs have also been developed that Fig. 146.5  Characteristic hand findings that can be seen in a child with an FASD: curved fifth finger (clinodactyly) and upper palmar crease that widens after the bend and ends between the second and third fingers (“hockey stick” crease). (Courtesy Darryl Leja, NHGRI, National Institutes of Health.) Fig. 146.6  Ear findings that can be seen in a child with an FASD: “rail- road track” appearance of ear creases. (Courtesy Darryl Leja, NHGRI, National Institutes of Health.) Table 146.1     Diagnostic Criteria for Fetal Alcohol Syndrome ALL of the following, with or without documented prenatal alcohol exposure: Facial features (Hoyme system requires two or more, 4-­Digit Diagnostic Code requires all three): • Palpebral fissures ≤10th percentile (Hoyme system) or ≤3rd percentile (4-­Digit code) • Thin upper lip (ranking of 4 or 5 on racially normed Lip-­Philtrum Guide*) • Smooth philtrum (ranking of 4 or 5 on racially normed Lip-­Philtrum Guide*) Prenatal and/or postnatal growth deficiency: • Height and/or weight ≤10% for age and sex at any point of time (prenatal or postnatal) • Adjust for gestational age if preterm. (4-­Digit Diagnostic Code puts emphasis on short stature) Deficient brain growth, abnormal brain formation or neurophysiology: one or more of following: • Head circumference ≤10th % (Hoyme system) or ≤3rd percentile (4-­Digit Diagnostic Code) • Structural brain abnormalities • Recurrent nonfebrile seizures with other causes excluded (Hoyme system) Neurobehavioral impairment: • For children <3 y/o: Developmental delay ≥1.5 SD below the mean • For children 3 y/o or older (either of the following): • Cognitive impairment: Scores ≥1.5 SD below mean (Hoyme) or ≥2 SD below mean (4-­Digit Diagnostic Code) either for global abilities or for at least one neurobehavioral domain (executive function, specific learning impairment, memory impairment, or visual-­spatial impairment). The Hoyme system defines impairment domain as normal or abnormal. The 4-­Digit Diagnostic Code has three domains defined: normal, moderate, severe. • Behavioral impairment without cognitive impairment: ≥1.5SD below mean in self-­regulation (mood or behavioral regulation), attention deficit, or impulse control. *The Hoyme system and the 4-­Digit Diagnostic Code have different Lip-­Philtrum Guides. SD, Standard deviation. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 146  u  Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder  1139 address specific areas of learning, such as Language and Literacy Train- ing Math Interactive Learning Experience. A cognitive-­based interven- tion, the Alert Program has been adapted to address self-­regulation and executive function difficulties in children with FAS or ARND living in foster care or adoptive homes. A video game, GoFar, was devel- oped by to address issues of self-­regulation. An intervention that uses rehearsal training interventions has been shown to result in improve- ment in working memory. Children with FASD have been found to show deficits in adaptive functioning more significant than expected based on their cognitive testing. Occupational therapy to address this issue can help to decrease the significant level of supervision and sup- port required of parents and caregivers. There are no medications that are approved specifically for FASDs, but some medications may be used for symptom management. These can include stimulants (for hyperactivity, inattention, and poor impulse con- trol), antidepressants, neuroleptics, and antianxiety drugs. Children with an FASD are often treated with a higher number of drugs and at higher doses, likely because of atypical or less favorable responses. Such atypical responses may require an adjustment in medication or discontinuation. Stimulant medication use in patients with FASD is controversial but is often considered, since there is a high prevalence of ADHD-like symptoms in this population. Stimulants can lead to some improvement in hyperac- tivity but may be less helpful for impulsivity and attention, and the rate of efficacy in general is not as high as in idiopathic ADHD. A diagnosis in the FASD spectrum should, in fact, be considered in a child with ADHD who has an atypical response to such medications. The efficacy of non- stimulant medications used for ADHD, such as alpha-2 agonists is being studied and may be shown to be helpful. Studies are also underway for use of choline supplementation and treatment with atomoxetine (a selective norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor). Data regarding the use of SSRI (selec- tive serotonin reuptake inhibitors) medications, antipsychotics, and mood stabilizers are limited in terms of efficacy and safety. THE PEDIATRICIAN/PRIMARY CARE PROVIDER’S ROLE Pediatricians and other primary care providers need to document findings related to PAE and refer the child for a full evaluation. Indications for refer- ral for further evaluation for FASD include confirmed history of significant PAE, concern raised by the caregiver about the possibility of FASD, all three facial features present, one or more facial features plus growth deficits, and one or more facial features along with one or more CNS abnormalities ± growth deficits. Evaluation for an FASD is best done by a multidisciplinary team that can provide a medical, genetic, and neuropsychologic assess- ment. This team might include a developmental behavioral pediatrician, psychologist/psychiatrist, geneticist, social worker, speech therapist, occu- pational therapist, physical therapist, and educational therapist/special education teacher. Evaluations by audiology and ophthalmology should be included if not already completed. Once a diagnosis of an FASD is made, the pediatrician’s/primary care providers role is important in establishing a medical home for the child that provides coordinated care between medical and mental health professionals, therapists, and educators who can help and sup- port the child and family. The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) has developed an FASD toolkit (https://www.aap.org/en-­us/advocacy-­ and-­policy/aap-­health-­initiatives/fetal-­alcohol-­spectrum-­disorders-­ toolkit/Pages/default.aspx) that includes a “Flow Diagram for Medical Home Evaluation of Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorders” to assist primary care providers in identifying children with an FASD and managing their challenges in an effort to reduce the lifelong adverse consequences. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Table 146.2     Diagnostic Criteria for Partial Fetal Alcohol Syndrome • WITH documented prenatal alcohol exposure (requires A and B): A.	 Facial features (at least two of three) B.	 Neurobehavioral impairment (same as for FAS), i.e., leaves out brain abnormalities and growth deficiency • WITHOUT documented prenatal alcohol exposure (requires A, B, and C): A.	 Facial features (at least two of three) B.	 Growth deficiency OR deficient brain growth/structural brain abnormalities/recurrent seizures (at least one of these) C.	 Neurobehavioral impairment (same as for FAS), i.e., same as FAS except it is EITHER growth deficiency OR brain growth/ structural brain abnormalities/recurrent seizures (does not require both) Note that the diagnosis of FAS and pFAS are the only FASDs that can be diagnosed in the absence of a confirmed maternal history of PAE. FAS, Fetal alcohol syndrome; FASD, fetal alcohol spectrum disorder; pFAS, partial fetal alcohol syndrome. Table 146.3     Diagnostic Criteria for Alcohol-­Related Neurodevelopmental Disorder Requires A and B: Note: Cannot be diagnosed definitively in children <3 yr old A.	 Documented prenatal alcohol exposure B.	 Neurobehavioral impairment: • WITH cognitive impairment: Global delay OR deficit in at least TWO neurobehavioral domains (executive function, specific learning impairment, memory impairment, visual-­spatial impairment) • WITHOUT cognitive impairment: Behavioral deficit in at least TWO domains (behavioral regulation, attention, impulse control) Table 146.4     Diagnostic Criteria for Neurobehavioral Disorder Associated with Prenatal Alcohol Exposure ND-­PAE is a mental health disorder (rather than a medical disorder) included in the DSM-­5 (2013) as a “new clarifying term” that encompasses the range of developmental disabilities associated with PAE that affect function and are not due to other conditions. This diagnosis requires: • ≥1 deficit in neurocognition • ≥2 deficits in adaptive functioning (at least one in communication or social communication and interaction) • ≥1 deficit in self-­regulation • History of maternal consumption of more than 13 alcoholic drinks in any 30-­day period of the pregnancy or more than 2 alcoholic drinks in one sitting • Onset of the disorder in childhood • The findings cause clinically significant distress or impairment in important areas of functioning and are not better explained by other causes (medication, medical conditions, genetic disorders, or environmental neglect) Although the diagnosis of ND-­PAE overlaps with ARND, ND-­PAE aims to describe the behavioral and mental health effects on an individual with PAE. Unlike ARND, a diagnosis of ND-­PAE can be given with or without the physical characteristics of FAS (ARND does not include physical characteristics) and the diagnosis of ND-­PAE can be given in addition to FAS or pFAS. ARND, Alcohol-­related neurodevelopmental disorder; DSM, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition; FAS, fetal alcohol syndrome; ND-­PAE, neurobehavioral disorder associated with prenatal alcohol exposure; pFAS, partial fetal alcohol syndrome. Table 146.5     Alcohol-­Related Birth Defects This diagnosis refers to a pattern of structural birth defects and other congenital abnormalities that can be characteristic of FASD. Requires both A and B A.	 Documented prenatal alcohol exposure B.	 One or more specific major malformations found to be the result of prenatal alcohol exposure: • Cardiac: ASD, VSD, aberrant great vessels, conotruncal heart defects • Skeletal: radioulnar synostosis, vertebral segmentation defects, large joint contractures, scoliosis • Renal: kidney/ureteral malformations • Eyes: strabismus, ptosis, retinal vascular abnormalities, optic nerve hypoplasia • Ears: conductive or neurosensory hearing loss ASD, Atrial septal defect; FASD, fetal alcohol spectrum disorder; VSD, ventricular septal defect. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1140  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant Diabetes (type 1, type 2, or gestational) in pregnancy increases the risk of complications and adverse outcomes in the mother and the baby. Complications related to diabetes are milder in gestational vs preges- tational (preexisting type 1 or type 2) diabetes. Pregnancy outcomes are correlated with onset, duration, and severity of maternal hypergly- cemia. Preconception planning and tight glycemic control (hemoglo- bin A1c [HbA1c] <6.5%) is crucial in pregestational diabetes to achieve the best outcomes for the mother and the baby. The risk of diabetic embryopathy (neural tube defects, cardiac defects, caudal regression syndrome) and spontaneous abortions is highest in those with preges- tational diabetes who have poor control (HbA1c >7%) in the first tri- mester. The risk of congenital malformations in gestational diabetes is only slightly increased compared to the general population, because the duration of diabetes is less and hyperglycemia occurs later in gesta- tion (typically >25 weeks). Mothers with pregestational and gestational diabetes have a high incidence of complications during the pregnancy. Polyhydramnios, preeclampsia, preterm labor (induced and spontaneous), and chronic hypertension occur more frequently in mothers with diabetes. Acceler- ated fetal growth is also common, and 36–45% of infants of diabetic mothers (IDMs) are born large for gestational age (LGA). Restricted fetal growth is seen in mothers with pregestational diabetes and vascu- lar disease, but it is less common. Fetal mortality rate is greater in both pregestational and gestational diabetic mothers than in nondiabetic mothers, but the rates have dropped precipitously over the years. Fetal loss throughout pregnancy is associated with poorly controlled mater- nal diabetes, especially diabetic ketoacidosis. The neonatal mortality rate of IDMs is >5 times that of infants of nondiabetic mothers and is higher at all gestational ages and in every birthweight for gestational age category. The rate is higher in women with pregestational diabetes, smoking, obesity, hypertension, and poor prenatal care. PATHOPHYSIOLOGY The probable pathogenic sequence is that maternal hyperglycemia causes fetal hyperglycemia, and the fetal pancreatic response leads to fetal hyperinsulinemia, or hyperinsulinism. It is important to recog- nize that while maternal glucose crosses the placenta, maternal and exogenous insulin does not. Fetal hyperinsulinemia and hyperglycemia then cause increased hepatic glucose uptake and glycogen synthesis, accelerated lipogenesis, and augmented protein synthesis (Fig. 147.1). Related pathologic findings are hypertrophy and hyperplasia of the pancreatic β cells, increased weight of the placenta and infant organs (except the brain), myocardial hypertrophy, increased amount of cyto- plasm in liver cells, and extramedullary hematopoiesis. Hyperinsulin- ism and hyperglycemia produce fetal acidosis, which may result in an increased rate of stillbirth. Separation of the placenta at birth suddenly interrupts glucose infusion into the neonate without a proportional effect on hyperinsulinism, leading to hypoglycemia during the first few hours after birth. The risk of rebound hypoglycemia can be diminished by tight blood glucose control during labor and delivery. Hyperinsulinemia has been documented in infants of mothers with pregestational and gestational diabetes. The infants of mothers with pre- gestational diabetes have significantly higher fasting plasma insulin lev- els than normal newborns, despite similar glucose levels, and respond to glucose with an abnormally prompt elevation in plasma insulin. After arginine administration, they also have an enhanced insulin response and increased disappearance rates of glucose compared with normal infants. In contrast, fasting glucose production and utilization rates are diminished in infants of mothers with gestational diabetes. Although hyperinsulinism is probably the main cause of hypoglyce- mia, the diminished epinephrine and glucagon responses that occur may be contributing factors. Infants of mothers with pregestational and gestational diabetes are at risk for neonatal hypoglycemia in the first hours of life, with an increased risk in both large-­ and small-­for-­ gestational-­age infants. Aggressive screening and treatment is recom- mended as outlined later. CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS Infants of mothers with pregestational diabetes and those of mothers with gestational diabetes often bear a surprising resemblance to each other (Fig. 147.2). They tend to be macrosomic as a result of increased body fat and enlarged viscera, with puffy, plethoric facies resembling those of patients who have been receiving corticosteroids. These infants may also be of normal birthweight if diabetes is well controlled or low birthweight if they are delivered before term or if their mothers have associated diabetic vascular disease. Infants that are macrosomic or LGA are at high risk of birth trauma (brachial plexus injury) and birth asphyxia because of not only their large size but also their decreased ability to tolerate stress, especially if they have cardiomyopathy and other effects of fetal hyperinsulinemia (Table 147.1). Hypoglycemia develops in approximately 25–50% of infants of mothers with pregestational diabetes and 15–25% of infants of mothers with gestational diabetes, but only a small percentage of these infants become symptomatic. The probability that hypoglycemia will develop in such infants increases with higher cord or maternal fasting blood glucose levels. The nadir in an infant’s blood glucose concentration is usually reached between 1 and 3 hours of age. Hypoglycemia can per- sist for 72 hours and in rare cases last up to 7 days. Frequent feedings can be used to treat the hypoglycemia, but some infants require intra- venous (IV) dextrose. Chapter 147 Infants of Diabetic Mothers Kesi C. Yang 1. Congenital anomalies (peri-con- ceptional) 2. Decreased early growth (0-20 weeks gestation) 3. Hyperinsul- inemia (20 weeks gestation) Maternal hyperglycemia Placenta Fetal hyper- glycemia 1. Neonatal hypoglycemia (0-7 days postnatal) 2. Surfactant deficiency (neonatal) 3. Immature liver metabolism (neonatal) a. Jaundice Fetal hyper- insulinemia 1. Fetal macrosomia (20 weeks gestation) a. Birth asphyxia b. Cardiomyopathy c. TTN 2. Fetal hypoxia (30 weeks gestation) a. Polycythemia c. Iron abnormalities Fetal hyper- glycemia and hyperinsulinemia b. Stroke, RVT Poor neurodevelopmental outcome Fig. 147.1  The fetal and neonatal events attributable to fetal hy- perglycemia (column 1), fetal hyperinsulinemia (column 2), or both in synergy (column 3). Time of risk is denoted in parentheses. RVT, Renal vein thrombosis; TTN, transient tachypnea of the newborn. (From Nold JL, Georgieff MK. Infants of diabetic mothers. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2004;51:619–637.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 147  u  Infants of Diabetic Mothers  1141 The infants tend to be jittery, tremulous, and hyperexcitable during the first 3 days after birth, although hypotonia, lethargy, and poor feed- ing may also occur. Early appearance of these signs is more likely to be related to hypoglycemia but can also be caused by hypocalcemia and hypomagnesemia, which also occur in the first 24-­72 hours of life due to delayed response of the parathormone system. Perinatal asphyxia is associated with increased irritability and also increases the risk of hypoglycemia, hypomagnesemia, and hypocalcemia. Tachypnea develops in many IDMs during the first 2 days after birth and may be a manifestation of hypoglycemia, hypothermia, polycythe- mia, cardiac failure, transient tachypnea, or cerebral edema from birth trauma or asphyxia. IDMs have a higher incidence of respiratory dis- tress syndrome (RDS) than do infants of nondiabetic mothers born at comparable gestational age. The greater incidence is likely related to an inhibitory effect of insulin on surfactant protein expression. Polycythemia often occurs with RDS as they are both a result of fetal hyperinsulinism. Cardiomegaly is common, and heart failure occurs in 5–10% of IDMs. Interventricular septal hypertrophy may occur and may manifest as transient idiopathic hypertrophic subaortic stenosis. This is thought to result from chronic hyperglycemia and chronic hyperinsulinism leading to glycogen loading in the heart. Inotropic agents worsen the obstruction and are contraindicated. β-­Adrenergic blockers have been shown to relieve the obstruction, but ultimately the condition resolves spontaneously over time. Acute neurologic abnormalities (lethargy, irritability, poor feed- ing) can be seen immediately after birth. The symptoms will resolve with treatment of the underlying cause but may persist for weeks if caused by birth asphyxia. Neurologic development and ossification centers tend to be immature and to correlate with brain size (which is not increased) and gestational age rather than total body weight in infants of mothers with gestational and pregestational diabetes. In addition, IDMs have an increased incidence of hyperbilirubinemia, polycythemia, iron deficiency, and renal vein thrombosis. Renal vein thrombosis should be suspected in the infant with a flank mass, hema- turia, and thrombocytopenia. There is a fourfold increase in congenital anomalies in infants of mothers with pregestational diabetes, and the risk varies with HbA1c during the first trimester when organogenesis occurs. The recom- mended goal for periconceptual HbA1c is <6.5%. Although the risk of congenital malformations increases with increasing HbA1c levels, there may still be an increased risk in the therapeutic goal range. Congenital anomalies of the central nervous system and cardiovascular system are most common, including failure of neural tube closure (encephalocele, meningomyelocele, and anencephaly), transposition of great vessels, ventricular septal defect (VSD), atrial septal defect (ASD), hypoplastic left heart, aortic stenosis, and coarctation of the aorta. Other less com- mon anomalies include caudal regression syndrome (Fig. 147.3), intes- tinal atresia, renal agenesis, hydronephrosis, and cystic kidneys. Small left colon syndrome is a rare anomaly that develops in the second and third trimester because of rapid fluctuations in maternal and therefore fetal glucose, leading to impaired intestinal motility and subsequent intestinal growth. Prenatal ultrasound and a thorough newborn physi- cal examination will identify most of these anomalies. High clinical Fig. 147.2  Macrosomic, plethoric infant of a mother with gestational diabetes. The baby was born at 38 weeks of gestation but weighed 9 lb, 11 oz (4,408 g). Mild respiratory distress was the only symptom other than appearance. Table 147.1     	 Morbidity in Infants of Diabetic Mothers Congenital anomalies Heart failure and septal hypertrophy of heart Surfactant deficiency, respiratory distress syndrome, transient tachypnea of the newborn, persistent pulmonary hypertension Hyperbilirubinemia Hypoglycemia, hypocalcemia, hypomagnesemia Macrosomia, nerve injury related to birth trauma Renal vein thrombosis Small left colon Unexplained intrauterine demise Polycythemia Visceromegaly Predisposition to later-­life obesity, insulin resistance, and diabetes From Devaskar SU, Garg M. Disorders of carbohydrate metabolism in the neonate. In: Martin RJ, Fanaroff AA, Walsh MC, eds. Fanaroff & Martin’s Neonatal-­Perinatal Medicine, 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015: Box 95-­3. Fig. 147.3  Caudal dysplasia sequence. Newborn male infant with a normal upper body and a short lower segment. (Modified from Jones KL, Jones MC, Del Campo M, eds. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Hu- man Malformation, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Fig. 1, p. 897.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1142  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant suspicion and a good prenatal history will help identify needed screen- ing for subtle anomalies. TREATMENT Preventive treatment of IDMs should be initiated before birth by means of preconception and frequent prenatal evaluations of all women with preexisting diabetes and pregnant women with gestational diabetes. This involves evaluation of fetal maturity, biophysical profile with non- stress testing (NST), Doppler velocimetry, and planning of the delivery of IDMs in hospitals where expert obstetric and pediatric care is con- tinuously available. Preconception glucose control reduces the risk of anomalies and other adverse outcomes in women with pregestational diabetes, and glucose control during labor reduces the incidence of neonatal hypoglycemia. Women with type 1 diabetes who have tight glucose control during pregnancy (average daily glucose levels <95 mg/dL and HgbA1c <6.5%, if safely achievable without hypoglycemia) deliver infants with birthweight and anthropomorphic features similar to those of infants of nondiabetic mothers. Treatment of gestational diabetes (diet, glucose monitoring, insulin, and oral antihyperglycemic treatment with metformin or glyburide as needed) decreases the rate of serious perinatal outcomes (death, shoulder dystocia, bone fracture, or nerve palsy). Continuous glucose monitoring has been increasingly used in pregnancy to achieve these purposes. In these mothers, the incidence of macrosomia and neonatal hypoglycemia is similar to that in mothers with insulin-­treated gestational diabetes. Regardless of size, IDMs should initially receive close observation and care. All infants should initiate feedings within 1 hour after birth. A screening glucose test should be performed no sooner than 30 min- utes of life but no later than 2 hours and should be performed imme- diately in symptomatic infants. Defining precise glucose thresholds in neonates remains a challenge. The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and the Pediatric Endocrine Society (PES) have both published guidelines based on observational data and expert opinion. These guidelines are adapted within individual institutions, with one example included in Figure 147.4. The AAP recommends maintaining a blood glucose level greater than 40 mg/dL (2.2 mmol/L) in the first 4 hours of life and greater than 45 mg/dL in the first 4 to 24 of life (2.5 mmol/L). In comparison, the PES recommends maintain a threshold of greater than 50 mg/dL (2.8 mmol/L) in the first 48 hours. Feeding is the initial treatment for asymptomatic hypoglycemia. Oral or gavage feeding with breast milk or formula per maternal pref- erence can be given. Dextrose gel has been shown to be a safe and Fig. 147.4  Neonatal hypoglycemia algorithm at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania. This was derived from institutional consensus and meant to serve as a sample management protocol as there is no defined threshold for neonatal hypoglycemia in the first day of life. IV, Intravenous; NICU, neonatal intensive care unit. *Units are mg/dL (mmol/L). Infants at risk for hypoglycemia Initiate feeds within 1 hour of birth Check glucose no sooner than 30 minutes but no later than 2 hours after birth Glucose ≥ 50 (2.8)* Glucose 30-49 (1.7-2.7) Glucose < 30 (1.7) Offer feeding Feed on cue 8-12 times for 24 hours Check prefeed glucose before next feed Administer 40% dextrose gel and then feed per maternal preference, continue skin to skin Check glucose 30 min after feed Intervention d/w team: IV dextrose bolus OR dextrose gel if asymptomatic If gel: administer and feed per maternal preference Check glucose 30 min after feed Repeat glucose level Glucose ≥ 50 (2.8) Glucose 30-49 (1.7-2.7) Glucose < 30 (1.7) Check next prefeed and can stop if ≥ 50 Continue feeding on cue Administer 40% dextrose gel and then feed per maternal preference, continue skin to skin Check glucose 30 min after feed If <50, can consider transfer to NICU If ≥ 50 repeat another prefeed Plan for NICU transfer for IV dextrose Repeat glucose at 24 hours of life Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 148  u  Epidemiology of Infections  1143 effective adjunct to feeding and should be administered if available. Infants with persistent (and unresponsive to oral therapy) hypoglyce- mia should be treated with IV glucose (bolus followed by continuous infusion), especially if symptomatic. If question arises about an infant’s ability to tolerate oral feeding, a continuous peripheral IV infusion at a rate of 4-­8 mg/kg/min should be given. Neurologic symptoms of hypo- glycemia must be treated with IV glucose. Bolus injections of hyper- tonic (25%) glucose should be avoided because they may cause further hyperinsulinemia and potentially produce rebound hypoglycemia (see Chapter 113). For treatment of hypocalcemia and hypermagnesemia, see Chapters 121.4 and 121.5; for RDS treatment, see Chapter 126; and for treatment of polycythemia, see Chapter 141. PROGNOSIS The subsequent incidence of diabetes mellitus in IDMs is higher than that in the general population because of genetic susceptibility in all types of diabetes. Infants of mothers with either pregestational diabe- tes or gestational diabetes are at risk for obesity and impaired glucose metabolism in later life as a result of intrauterine exposure to hyper- glycemia. Disagreement persists about whether IDMs have a slightly increased risk of impaired intellectual development because of the many confounding factors (e.g., parental education, maternal age, neonatal complications). In general, the outcomes have improved over the last several decades due to increased awareness, screening, and improved prenatal care for pregnant women with diabetes. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Neonatal infections are often classified by their timing relative to birth and include congenital, perinatal, early-­onset, and late-­onset disease. This categorization is clinically useful because infectious mechanisms, etiologies, and outcomes are fairly distinct for each, although there is some overlap between the different types. Congenital infection denotes infection acquired in utero. Such infections are often associated with injury to developing organs, depending on the timing of infec- tion during gestation (see Chapter 149). Perinatal infection indicates acquisition around the time of delivery. Perinatally acquired organisms include both bacteria and viruses, some of which are the same as those causing congenital infection, but often manifest with different features. Early-­onset infection occurs in the first 3 days after birth and is gener- ally the consequence of infection caused by organisms acquired during the perinatal period. Late-­onset infection occurs after 3 days and is caused by organisms that are typically acquired in the postnatal period. Notably, some studies categorize early-­onset and late-­onset infections as within the first 7 days of age and after 7 days, respectively, particu- larly for infants not continuously admitted to the hospital from birth, who are exposed to pathogens in the community. Neonates are prone to infection for multiple reasons, namely because of their lack of fully responsive innate immunity (Fig. 148.1). Attenu- ated immune responses often result in minimal or nonspecific clini- cal manifestations, and effective treatment requires attention to subtle signs of infection and known risk factors. Compared with older infants, neonates are often treated empirically with systemic antimicrobials while awaiting results of laboratory investigations. Preterm infants are Chapter 148 Epidemiology of Infections Dustin D. Flannery particularly susceptible to infection because of their decreased innate immune and barrier defenses, need for invasive medical devices such as central venous catheters, and prolonged hospitalizations. The term “neonatal sepsis” typically refers to culture-­confirmed infection of the blood, cerebrospinal fluid, and/or urine, though definitions vary across studies. INCIDENCE Despite advances in maternal and neonatal care, infections remain a frequent and important cause of neonatal and infant morbidity and mortality. Neonatal infections are more common in areas with limited access to healthcare than in areas with a well-­established healthcare infrastructure. Estimated incidence rates vary based on the case defi- nition, geographical region, and the population studied. The overall global incidence of neonatal sepsis and other severe infections remains unknown given the lack of data from many countries, though the disease is common and often fatal. The global incidence is estimated at 2,824 cases per 100,000 live births; ∼18% are fatal. For congenital infections, the incidence varies greatly depending on the specific infec- tious etiology and geographic region, though low-­ and middle-­income countries have the greatest burden of disease. The overall incidence of early-­onset infection in the United States is approximately 1 per 1,000 live births and is dramatically higher among infants born preterm. The incidence varies significantly by gestational age (GA) and is highest among infants with a GA of 22 to 28 weeks (18.5 cases per 1,000 births). A 2021 report of over 84,000 very pre- term infants at centers in the United States estimated the incidence of early-­onset infection at 13.5 per 1,000 births; the incidence again var- ied substantially by GA (Table 148.1) and was highest for infants born <24 weeks (45.4 per 1,000 births). Similar to early-­onset infection, late-­ onset infection incidence is inversely related to the degree of prema- turity with significant variation across centers and geography. Among hospitalized newborns, 0.6–14% develop late-­onset infection, with up to 40% of very preterm infants suffering from at least one episode. MICROBIOLOGY Infection microbiology is critically important to inform preventative strategies, as well as empiric and targeted antimicrobial therapies. A number of bacterial and nonbacterial pathogens can infect fetuses and newborns. Although there is overlap, pathogen types may be distin- guished by timing of infection (Table 148.2). The TORCH pneumonic, although not all-­encompassing, is used to describe common causes of most often congenital or perinatal but also postnatal infection (see Table 148.2): toxoplasmosis, Treponema pallidum (syphilis), rubella, cytomegalovirus (CMV), herpes simplex virus (HSV), hepatitis B virus (HBV), hepatitis C virus (HCV), HIV, and other pathogens including parvovirus B19, varicella, and tubercu- losis (TB). For pathogens causing congenital (prenatal), perinatal, and postnatal infection, modes of transfer include transplacental infection, exposure during labor and delivery through an infected or colonized birth canal, or from contact with an infected caretaker and/or infected breast milk (see Chapter 149). Some viral infections (e.g., CMV) can be substantial causes of disease whether acquired during gestation or acquired postpartum, whereas others (e.g., respiratory syncytial virus) are typically acquired only in the postnatal period (Fig. 148.2). The two most common bacterial causes of early-­onset infection are group B Streptococcus (GBS) and Escherichia coli; GBS is most common among term infants, whereas E. coli is the predominant pathogen among preterm infants. Approximately 30% of early-­onset infections are caused by organisms other than GBS or E. coli (see Table 148.2). Coagulase-­ negative staphylococci (CONS) are the predominant cause of late-­onset infection in hospitalized neonates, often accounting for 50–80%. Other common causes (see Table 148.2) include Staphylococcus aureus, gram-­ negative bacilli (E. coli, Klebsiella spp., Enterobacter spp., Pseudomonas spp.), and fungi (Candida spp.). In Asia and Africa additional pathogens cause early-onset sepsis (Acinetobacter spp., Klebsiella pneumoniae); these pathogens are often resistant to first-line antibiotics. Microorganisms causing pneumonia acquired during labor and deliv- ery include GBS, gram-­negative enteric aerobes, Listeria monocytogenes, Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1144  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant Fig. 148.1  Ontogeny of skin, soluble, and cellular innate defense systems. Host-­protective barrier functions include physical, chemical, and func- tional components of the skin and mucous membrane epithelia of the fetus, neonate (birth to 28 days of age), and infant (1 month to 1 year of age). Skin: while physical and chemical barriers are impaired in early in life, especially in the preterm newborn, the vernix caseosa and skin epithelia of full-­term newborns robustly express antimicrobial proteins and peptides (APPs). Mucous membranes: in parallel with and induced by an increas- ingly complex microbiota, the newborn intestinal mucosal epithelium rapidly changes structurally, with an increase in the population of crypts and crypt-­based Paneth cells, as well as functionally with increasing APP expression. Blood: the composition of neonatal blood is distinct, with relatively low concentrations of complement components and APPs and high concentrations of the immunosuppressive purine metabolite adenosine. Plasma also contains maternal antibodies that are transferred beginning midgestation and supplemented by postnatal factors derived from breast milk. Innate immunity is detectable from the end of the first month of gestation, with changes driven largely by the increasing exposure to environmental microbes. Neonatal antigen-­presenting cells such as blood monocytes express pattern recognition receptors (e.g., toll-­like receptors [TLRs]) with dis- tinct functional responses, including limited Th1-­polarizing cytokine production, to most stimuli. Adaptive immunity develops from 4 weeks of gesta- tion onward, with changes driven by an evolving chimerism reflecting fetal (liver-­derived, shaded cells) regulatory T (Treg)-­cell–rich lymphocytes, and more adultlike (bone marrow derived, unshaded cells) lymphocytes with distinct, epigenetically encoded functional programs. Ig, Immunoglobulin; RBC, red blood cell. (Modified from Kollmann TR, Kampmann B, Mazmanian SK, et al. Protecting the newborn and young infant from infectious diseases: lessons from immune ontogeny. Immunity. 2007;46:350–363.) Fetal/Preterm Newborn/Full Term Infant Adult Tolerance to noninherited maternal alloantigens Shield vs. infection Controlled inflammation Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) Treg cells Colonizing bacteria Adenosine Complement proteins Effector cytokines T 1 polarizing cytokines CD71+ Nucleated RBC Fetal cells (liver derived) Antimicrobial proteins and peptides (APPs) Maternal secretory IgA Maternal IgG Endogenous IgG TLRs Adult-like cells (bone marrow derived): Vernix caseosa Epidermis Endothelial cells Adenosine Complement proteins APPs Innate lymphocytes T 1 polarizing cytokines Maternal antibodies Developmental challenge: Monocytes Innate lymphocytes Paneth cells MUCOUS MEMBRANES SKIN BLOOD Treg cells MDSCs Commensal tolerance/ Pathogen protection Table 148.1     Incidence of Early-­Onset Infection Among Very Preterm Infants CATEGORY INCIDENCE RATE PER 1,000 BIRTHS (99% CI) Overall 13.5 (12.5-­14.6) Gestational age, completed weeks ≤23 45.4 (38.3-­53.7) 24-­25 26.0 (22.6-­29.9) 26-­27 15.5 (13.2-­18.2) 28-­29 10.1 (8.5-­11.9) Adapted from Flannery DD, Edwards EM, Puopolo KM, et al. Early-­onset sepsis among very preterm infants. Pediatrics. 2021;148(4):e2021052456. Mycoplasma, Chlamydia trachomatis, CMV, HSV, and Candida spp. (Table 148.3). The most common bacterial causes of neonatal men- ingitis are GBS, E. coli, L. monocytogenes, Streptococcus pneumoniae, other streptococci, Haemophilus influenzae, both coagulase-­positive and coagulase-­negative staphylococci, and other gram-­negative bacilli. Treponema pallidum and TB infection involving the central nervous sys- tem (CNS) may also result in meningitis. PATHOGENESIS Early-­Onset Infections In most cases, the fetus or neonate is not exposed to potentially pathogenic bacteria until the membranes rupture and the infant passes through the birth canal and/or enters the extrauterine environ- ment. The human birth canal is colonized with aerobic and anaero- bic organisms that may result in ascending amniotic infection and/or Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 148  u  Epidemiology of Infections  1145 colonization of the neonate at birth. Vertical transmission of agents that infect the amniotic fluid and vaginal canal, and contamination from the gastrointestinal tract, may occur in utero or, more often, dur- ing labor and delivery (Fig. 148.3). Chorioamnionitis results from microbial invasion of amniotic fluid, often as a result of prolonged rupture of the chorioamniotic membrane. Amniotic infection may also occur with apparently intact membranes or with a relatively brief duration of membrane rupture. The term chorioamnionitis refers to the clinical syndrome of intrauterine infec- tion, which includes maternal fever, with or without local or systemic signs of chorioamnionitis (uterine tenderness, foul-­smelling vaginal discharge/amniotic fluid, maternal leukocytosis, maternal and/or fetal tachycardia). Chorioamnionitis may also be asymptomatic, diagnosed only by amniotic fluid analysis or pathologic examination of the pla- centa. The rate of histologic chorioamnionitis is inversely related to GA at birth (Fig. 148.4) and directly related to duration of membrane Table 148.3     Etiologic Agents of Neonatal Pneumonia According to Timing of Acquisition TRANSPLACENTAL Cytomegalovirus (CMV) Herpes simplex virus (HSV) Mycobacterium tuberculosis Rubella virus Treponema pallidum Varicella-­zoster virus (VZV) Listeria monocytogenes PERINATAL Anaerobic bacteria Chlamydia CMV Enteric bacteria Group B Streptococci Haemophilus influenzae HSV Listeria monocytogenes Mycoplasma POSTNATAL Adenovirus Candida spp.* Coagulase-­negative staphylococci CMV Enteric bacteria* Enteroviruses Influenza viruses A, B Parainfluenza Pseudomonas* Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) Staphylococcus aureus Mycobacterium tuberculosis Legionella *More likely with mechanical ventilation or indwelling catheters, or after abdominal surgery. Amniotic Infection Aspiration Pneumonia 6 Bacteremia In utero Intrapartum Vaginal secretions Ingestion Gastrointestinal colonization 6 Invasion Aspiration 6 Bacteremia Ingestion Fig. 148.3  Pathways of ascending or intrapartum infection. 70 0 Histological chorioamnionitis % 20–24 25 Gestational Age (completed weeks) 28 30 31 33 26 27 29 32 34 40 10 60 30 50 20 Fig. 148.4  Histologic chorioamnionitis in liveborn preterm babies by gestational age (n = 3,928 babies). (From Lahra MM, Jeffery HE. A fetal response to chorioamnionitis is associated with early survival after pre- term birth. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2004;190:147–151.) Table 148.2     Most Common Pathogens Causing Neonatal Infections, Grouped by Timing of Infection CONGENITAL/PERINATAL • Toxoplasmosis • Treponema pallidum (syphilis) • Rubella • Cytomegalovirus • Herpes simplex virus • Hepatitis B and C • Human immunodeficiency virus • Varicella • Parvovirus B19 • Tuberculosis • Zika virus EARLY-­ONSET • Group B Streptococcus • Escherichia coli • Haemophilus species • Staphylococcus aureus • Klebsiella species • Enterococcus species • Herpes simplex virus • Streptococcus anginosus • Listeria monocytogenes • Enterobacter species • Citrobacter species • Streptococcus pneumoniae • Morganella morganii • Pseudomonas species • Serratia species • Bacteroides species LATE-­ONSET • Coagulase-­negative staphylococci • Staphylococcus aureus • Escherichia coli • Candida species • Enterococcus species • Group B Streptococcus • Klebsiella species • Enterobacter species • Pseudomonas species • Respiratory syncytial virus • Herpes simplex virus • Enteroviruses • Listeria monocytogenes Cytomegalovirus Zika virus Parvovirus B19 Varicella–zoster Rubella LCMV HSV HIV Parechovirus EBV HHV-6, HHV-7 Hepatitis B, C HSV HIV Hepatitis B, C Enterovirus Cytomegalovirus Adenovirus Parechovirus Varicella–zoster Respiratory syncytial virus Enterovirus Rotavirus Cytomegalovirus Varicella–zoster virus Hepatitis Adenovirus Influenza Prenatal Perinatal/intrapartum Postnatal Fig. 148.2  Relative importance of neonatal viral infections related to the timing of acquisition of infection. Viruses are listed in declining order of importance relative to prenatal, perinatal (intrapartum), and postnatal timing of typical infection. Some neonatal virus infections (e.g., cytomeg- alovirus) can be substantial causes of disease whether acquired during gestation or acquired postpartum, whereas others (e.g., respiratory syncy- tial virus) are typically acquired in the postnatal period. EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; HHV, human herpesvirus; HSV, herpes simplex virus; LCMV, lympho- cytic choriomeningitis virus. (From Schleiss MR, Marsh KJ. Viral infections of the fetus and newborn. In: Gleason CA, Juul SE, eds. Avery’s Diseases of the Newborn. 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018: Fig. 37.1.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1146  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant rupture. Chorioamnionitis increases the risk of neonatal sepsis; how- ever, most infants exposed to chorioamnionitis do not develop sepsis. Chorioamnionitis was thought to result from infection of the amni- otic fluid but is now better defined by the term intrauterine inflamma- tion or infection at birth (Triple I). This is defined by fetal tachycardia, maternal leukocytosis (>15,000 cells in the absence of corticosteroids), purulent fluid from the cervical os, biochemical or microbiologic amniotic fluid changes consistent with infection, and fever (≥39.0°C) (see Chapter 149.2). Bacterial colonization does not always result in fetal or neonatal dis- ease. Factors influencing which colonized infant will experience disease are not well understood but include prematurity, underlying illness, invasive procedures, inoculum size, virulence of the infecting organ- ism, genetic predisposition, the innate immune system, host response, and transplacental maternal antibodies (Fig. 148.5). Aspiration or ingestion of bacteria in amniotic fluid may lead to congenital pneu- monia or systemic infection, with manifestations becoming apparent before delivery (fetal distress, tachycardia), at delivery (apnea, respira- tory distress, shock), or after a latent period of a few hours (respiratory distress, shock). Aspiration or ingestion of bacteria during the birth process may lead to infection after an interval of 1-­2 days. Resuscitation at birth, particularly if it involves endotracheal intu- bation, insertion of an umbilical vessel catheter, or both, is associated with an increased risk of bacterial infection. Explanations include the presence of infection at the time of birth or acquisition of infection during the invasive procedures associated with resuscitation. Late-­Onset Infections After birth, neonates are exposed to infectious agents in the hospital or in the community (including family and caretakers). Postnatal infec- tions may be transmitted by direct contact with hospital personnel, the mother, or other caretakers; from breast milk (e.g., HIV, CMV); or from inanimate sources such as contaminated equipment or surfaces. The most common source of postnatal infections in hospitalized new- borns is hand contamination of healthcare personnel, underscoring the importance of hand hygiene. Contaminated milk, especially powdered formula (Cronobacter sakazakii, Salmonella), equipment, other objects, or the environment are rare sources of neonatal infections but should be suspected during outbreaks of single organism disease. Most cases of meningitis result from hematogenous dissemination. Less often, meningitis results from contiguous spread as a result of contamination of open neural tube defects, congenital sinus tracts, or penetrating wounds from fetal scalp sampling or internal fetal electro- cardiographic monitors. Cerebral abscess formation, ventriculitis, sep- tic infarcts, hydrocephalus, and subdural effusions are complications of meningitis that occur more often in newborn infants than in older children. Metabolic factors, including hypoxia, acidosis, hypothermia, and inherited metabolic disorders (e.g., galactosemia), are likely to contribute to risk for and severity of neonatal infection. Infection in Premature Infants The most important neonatal factors predisposing to infection are pre- maturity and low birthweight. Premature infants have a 3-­ to 10-­fold higher incidence of infection than full-­term normal birthweight infants. Possible explanations include the following: (1) maternal genital tract infection is considered to be an important cause of preterm labor, with an increased risk of vertical transmission to the newborn; (2) the fre- quency of intraamniotic infection is inversely related to GA (see Figs. 148.1 and 148.5); (3) premature infants have documented immune dys- function; and (4) premature infants often require prolonged intrave- nous access, endotracheal intubation, or other invasive procedures that provide a portal of entry or impair barrier and clearance mechanisms, putting them at continued risk for hospital-­acquired infections. CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS The maternal history and circumstances of delivery provide important information about maternal exposures to infectious diseases, bacterial colonization, immunity (natural and acquired), and obstetric risk fac- tors (prematurity, prolonged ruptured membranes, maternal chorio- amnionitis). Signs and symptoms in the neonate are often subtle and nonspecific. Temperature instability, tachypnea, lethargy, apnea, and poor feeding are common initial signs and should raise suspicion for systemic or focal infection (Table 148.4). Bacterial Sepsis Neonates with bacterial sepsis may have either nonspecific mani- festations or focal signs of infection (see Table 148.4), including temperature instability, hypotension, poor perfusion with pallor and mottled skin, metabolic acidosis, tachycardia or bradycardia, apnea, respiratory distress, grunting, cyanosis, irritability, lethargy, seizures, feeding intolerance, abdominal distention, jaundice, pete- chiae, purpura, and bleeding. Table 148.5 lists World Health Orga- nization international criteria for sepsis. The initial manifestation may involve only limited symptomatology and only one system, such as apnea alone or tachypnea with retractions, or tachycardia, or the infant may present with an acute catastrophic manifestation EXPOSURE TO ORGANISM Gestation 37 wk ROM 12 hr No underlying illness Effective local immunity/ mucosal and skin barriers Transplacental antibody to infecting strain Less virulent organism Low inoculum Gestation 37 wk ROM 18 hr Underlying illness Decreased local and/or systemic immune function Inadequate transplacental antibody to infecting strain Ventilation, catheters Virulent organism High inoculum HEALTH DISEASE Fig. 148.5  Factors influencing the balance between health and dis- ease in neonates exposed to a potential pathogen. ROM, Rupture of membranes. (Adapted from Baker CJ. Group B streptococcal infec- tions. Clin Perinatol 1997;24:59–70.) Table 148.4     Initial Signs and Symptoms of Infection in Newborn Infants GENERAL Fever, temperature instability Hypothermia “Not doing well” Poor feeding Edema GASTROINTESTINAL Abdominal distention Vomiting Diarrhea Hepatomegaly RESPIRATORY Apnea, dyspnea Tachypnea, retractions Flaring, grunting Cyanosis RENAL SYSTEM Oliguria CARDIOVASCULAR Pallor; mottling; cold, clammy skin Tachycardia Hypotension Bradycardia CENTRAL NERVOUS Irritability, lethargy Tremors, seizures Hyporeflexia, hypotonia Abnormal Moro reflex Irregular respirations Full fontanel High-­pitched cry HEMATOLOGIC Jaundice Splenomegaly Pallor Petechiae, purpura Bleeding Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 148  u  Epidemiology of Infections  1147 with multiorgan dysfunction and shock. Infants should be reevalu- ated over time to determine whether the symptoms have progressed from mild to severe. Later complications of sepsis include respira- tory failure, pulmonary hypertension, cardiac failure, shock, renal failure, liver dysfunction, cerebral edema or thrombosis, adrenal hemorrhage and/or insufficiency, bone marrow dysfunction (neu- tropenia, thrombocytopenia, anemia), and disseminated intravas- cular coagulopathy (DIC). A variety of noninfectious conditions can occur together with neonatal infection or can make the diagnosis of infection more dif- ficult. Respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) secondary to surfactant deficiency can mimic and/or coexist with bacterial pneumonia in premature infants. Because bacterial sepsis can be rapidly progres- sive, the physician must be alert to the signs and symptoms of possi- ble infection and must initiate diagnostic evaluation and empirical therapy in a timely manner for infants at risk. The differential diag- nosis of many of the signs and symptoms that suggest infection is extensive; noninfectious disorders must also be considered (Table 148.6). Systemic Inflammatory Response Syndrome The clinical manifestations of infection depend on the virulence of the infecting organism and the body’s inflammatory response. The term systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) is most frequently used to describe this unique process of infection and the subsequent systemic response (see Chapter 85). In addition to infection, SIRS may result from trauma, hemorrhagic shock, other causes of ischemia and inflammation, necrotizing enterocolitis, and pancreatitis. Patients with SIRS have a spectrum of clinical symptoms that rep- resent progressive stages of the pathologic process. In adults, SIRS is defined by the presence of two or more of the following: (1) fever or hypothermia, (2) tachycardia, (3) tachypnea, and (4) abnormal white blood cell (WBC) count or an increase in immature forms. In neo- nates and pediatric patients, SIRS manifests as temperature instabil- ity, respiratory dysfunction (altered gas exchange, hypoxemia, acute RDS), cardiac dysfunction (tachycardia, delayed capillary refill, hypo- tension), and perfusion abnormalities (oliguria, metabolic acidosis) (Table 148.7). Increased vascular permeability results in capillary leak into peripheral tissues and the lungs, with resultant peripheral and pul- monary edema. DIC results in the more severely affected cases. The cascade of escalating tissue injury may lead to multisystem organ fail- ure and death. There are neonates who appear to have sepsis or SIRS but no bacte- rial or viral pathogen has been recovered. Culture negative sepsis may be due to a hard-­to-­culture bacteria (anaerobes) or virus, as well as noninfectious inflammatory conditions. In addition, an undetected localized source with transient bacteremia (osteomyelitis), prior anti- biotic treatment, and poor culture technique (too small blood sample for culture may miss bacteremia) may be responsible. Temperature Instability Fever or hypothermia may be the only initial manifestation of serious infection in newborns. However, only approximately 50% of infected newborn infants have a temperature >37.8°C (see Chapter 220). Fever in newborn infants does not always signify infection; it may be caused Table 148.6     Serious Systemic Illness in Newborns: Differential Diagnosis of Neonatal Sepsis CARDIAC Congenital: hypoplastic left heart syndrome, other structural disease, persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn (PPHN) Acquired: myocarditis, hypovolemic or cardiogenic shock, PPHN GASTROINTESTINAL Necrotizing enterocolitis Spontaneous gastrointestinal perforation Midgut volvulus Hepatic failure (inborn errors of metabolism, neonatal iron storage disease) HEMATOLOGIC Neonatal purpura fulminans Immune-­mediated thrombocytopenia Immune-­mediated neutropenia Severe anemia Malignancies (congenital leukemia) Langerhans cell histiocytosis Hereditary clotting disorders Familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis METABOLIC Hypoglycemia Adrenal disorders: adrenal hemorrhage, adrenal insufficiency, congenital adrenal hyperplasia Inborn errors of metabolism: organic acidurias, lactic acidoses, urea cycle disorders, galactosemia NEUROLOGIC Intracranial hemorrhage: spontaneous, caused by child abuse Hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy Neonatal seizures Infant botulism RESPIRATORY Respiratory distress syndrome Aspiration pneumonia: amniotic fluid, meconium, or gastric contents Lung hypoplasia Tracheoesophageal fistula Transient tachypnea of the newborn Table 148.7     Definitions of Systemic Inflammatory Respiratory Response Syndrome (SIRS) and Sepsis in Pediatric Patients SIRS: The systemic inflammatory response to a variety of clinical insults, manifested by two or more of the following conditions: Temperature instability <35°C (95°F) or >38.5°C (101.3°F) Respiratory dysfunction: Tachypnea >2 SD above the mean for age Hypoxemia (Pao2 <70 mm Hg on room air) Cardiac dysfunction: Tachycardia >2 SD above the mean for age Delayed capillary refill >3 sec Hypotension >2 SD below the mean for age Perfusion abnormalities: Oliguria (urine output <0.5 mL/kg/hr) Lactic acidosis (elevated plasma lactate and/or arterial pH <7.25) Altered mental status Sepsis: The systemic inflammatory response to an infectious process SD, Standard deviation. From Adams-­Chapman I, Stoll BJ. Systemic inflammatory response syndrome. Semin Pediatr Infect Dis. 2001;12:5–16. Table 148.5     Clinical Criteria for the Diagnosis of Sepsis in the International Setting: IMCI and WHO Criteria for Severe Infections in Children • Neurologic: Convulsions, drowsy or unconscious, decreased activity, bulging fontanel • Respiratory: Respiratory rate >60 breaths/min, grunting, severe chest indrawing, central cyanosis • Cardiac: Poor perfusion, rapid and weak pulse • Gastrointestinal: Jaundice, poor feeding, abdominal distention • Dermatologic: Skin pustules, periumbilical erythema or purulence • Musculoskeletal: Edema or erythema overlying bones or joints • Other: Temperature >37.7°C (99.9°F; or feels hot) or <35.5°C (95.9°F; or feels cold) IMCI, Integrated Management of Childhood Illness; WHO, World Health Organization. Adapted from WHO. Pocket Book Of Hospital Care for Children: Guidelines for the Management of Common Childhood Illnesses. 2nd ed. Geneva: WHO. 2013. p 45–69. http://www.who.int/maternal_child_adolescent/documents/child_hospital_care/en/. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1148  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant by increased ambient temperature, isolette or radiant warmer mal- function, dehydration, CNS disorders, hyperthyroidism, familial dys- autonomia, or ectodermal dysplasia. A single temperature elevation is infrequently associated with infection; sustained fever is more likely to be caused by infection. Most febrile infected infants have additional signs compatible with infection, although a focus of infection is not always apparent. Acute febrile illnesses occurring later in the neonatal period may be caused by urinary tract infection, meningitis, pneumo- nia, osteomyelitis, or gastroenteritis and viral infections (enteroviruses, others) in addition to sepsis, thus underscoring the importance of a diagnostic evaluation that includes blood culture, urine culture, lum- bar puncture (LP), and other studies as indicated. Numerous patho- gens may cause these late infections (see Table 148.2), including HSV, enteroviruses, respiratory syncytial virus, and bacterial organisms. In premature infants, hypothermia or temperature instability requiring increasing ambient (isolette, warmer) temperatures is more likely to accompany infection. Respiratory and Cardiovascular Symptoms Early signs and symptoms of pneumonia may be nonspecific, includ- ing poor feeding, lethargy, irritability, cyanosis, temperature instabil- ity, and the overall impression that the infant is not well. Respiratory symptoms of increasing severity include grunting, tachypnea, retrac- tions, nasal flaring, cyanosis, apnea, and progressive respiratory failure. If the infant is premature, signs of progressive respiratory distress may be superimposed on RDS or bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD). For mechanically ventilated infants, the need to increase ventilator support may indicate infection. Although a common finding in neonatal sepsis, tachycardia is nonspecific. Bradycardia may also occur. Poor perfu- sion and hypotension are more sensitive indicators of sepsis but tend to be late findings. In a prospective national surveillance study, 40% of neonates with sepsis required volume expansion, and 29% required vasopressor support. Signs of pneumonia on physical examination, such as dullness to percussion, change in breath sounds, and the presence of rales or rhonchi, are very difficult to appreciate in a neonate. Radiographs of the chest may reveal new infiltrates or an effusion, but if the neonate has underlying RDS or BPD, it is very difficult to determine whether the radiographic changes represent a new process or worsening of the underlying disease. The progression of neonatal pneumonia can be variable. Fulminant infection is most frequently associated with pyogenic organisms such as GBS (see Chapter 230). Onset may occur during the first hours or days of life, with the infant often manifesting rapidly progressive cir- culatory collapse and respiratory failure. With early-­onset pneumonia in premature infants, the clinical course and chest radiographs may be indistinguishable from those with severe RDS, particularly for GBS pneumonia. In contrast to the rapid progression of pneumonia caused by pyo- genic organisms, an indolent course may be seen in nonbacterial infection. The onset can be preceded by upper respiratory tract symp- toms or conjunctivitis. The infant may demonstrate a nonproductive cough, and the degree of respiratory compromise is variable. Fever is usually absent or low grade, and radiographic examination of the chest shows focal or diffuse interstitial pneumonitis or hyperinflation. Infec- tion can be caused by C. trachomatis, CMV, Ureaplasma urealyticum, and other respiratory viruses. Rhinovirus has been reported to cause severe respiratory compromise in infants, particularly those who are preterm. Conjunctivitis Conjunctival infection is relatively common and may be caused by a variety of organisms. The presentation includes periorbital swelling, conjunctival injection, and purulent conjunctival drainage. C. tra- chomatis and Neisseria gonorrhoeae are common causes; other gram-­ positive and gram-­negative organisms are occasionally involved. Pseudomonas aeruginosa is an important pathogen in hospitalized preterm infants and may be a precursor to invasive disease. Viral infec- tions (e.g., HSV, adenovirus) are occasionally seen. Recognition of HSV infection is important to prevent corneal injury and dissemina- tion to systemic sites. Skin and Soft Tissue Infection Cutaneous manifestations of infection include omphalitis, cellulitis, mastitis, and subcutaneous abscesses. Pustules likely indicate the presence of staphylococcal infection but must be distinguished from the vesicular rash of HSV infection. Staphylococcal pustulosis results in larger, pus-­filled lesions often scattered around the umbilicus, whereas HSV infection often appears as tiny vesicles in crops, often on the scalp. The presence of small, salmon-­pink papules suggests L. monocytogenes infection. Mucocutaneous lesions suggest Candida spp. (see Chapter 280.1). Petechiae and purpura may be the result of systemic viral or bacterial infection. Neonatal mastitis is caused by S. aureus and in an otherwise well appearing afebrile neonate is a local- ized infection. Omphalitis Omphalitis is a neonatal infection resulting from unhygienic care of the umbilical cord, which continues to be a problem, particularly in developing countries. The umbilical stump is colonized by bacteria from the maternal genital tract and the environment (see Chapter 144). The necrotic tissue of the umbilical cord is an excellent medium for bacterial growth. Omphalitis may remain a localized infection or may spread to the abdominal wall, the peritoneum, the umbilical or portal vessels, and the liver. Abdominal wall cellulitis or necrotizing fasci- itis, with associated sepsis and a high mortality rate, may develop in infants with omphalitis. Prompt diagnosis and treatment are necessary to avoid serious complications. S. aureus and gram-­negative organisms are common involved pathogens. Tetanus Neonatal tetanus remains a serious infection in resource-­limited coun- tries (see Chapter 257). It results from unclean delivery and unhygienic management of the umbilical cord in an infant born to a mother who has not been immunized against tetanus. The surveillance case defini- tion of neonatal tetanus requires the ability of a newborn to suck at birth and for the first few days of life, followed by an inability to suck. Neonatal tetanus typically occurs in infants 5-­7 days after birth (range: 3-­24 days) and is complicated by difficulty swallowing, spasms, stiff- ness, seizures, and death. Bronchopneumonia, presumably resulting from aspiration, is another complication and cause of death. Neona- tal tetanus can be prevented by immunizing mothers before or dur- ing pregnancy and by ensuring a clean delivery, sterile cutting of the umbilical cord, and proper cord care after birth. LABORATORY FINDINGS Maternal history and infant signs should guide diagnostic evaluation (Table 148.8). Additionally, signs of systemic infection in newborn infants may be unrevealing, so laboratory investigation plays a particu- larly important role in diagnosis. Cultures and cell counts are obtained from blood and urine. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) should be sent for Gram stain, routine culture, cell count with differential, and protein/glucose concentrations. Surface swabs, blood, and CSF are often obtained for HSV testing. Except for culture and directed pathogen testing, no single laboratory test is completely reliable for diagnosis of invasive infection in the newborn. CBC may demonstrate elevated or decreased WBC count, often with a shift toward more immature forms. Thrombocytopenia can be seen in systemic bacterial, fungal, or viral infection. Hyponatremia, acidosis, and other electrolyte abnormalities can be seen. Hyperbiliru- binemia is nonspecific but may be an indication of systemic infection, particularly of the urine tract. Elevated serum transaminases may be a clue to systemic HSV, enterovirus, or other viral infection. Various serum biomarkers have been investigated for their ability to identify infants with serious bacterial infection (SBI). An immature-­ to-­total phagocyte count (I/T ratio) (≥0.2) has the best sensitivity of the neutrophil indices for predicting neonatal sepsis. After the new- born period, serum C-­reactive protein (CRP), procalcitonin, and fer- ritin have demonstrated reasonable sensitivity and specificity for SBI. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 148  u  Epidemiology of Infections  1149 CRP may be monitored serially in newborn infants to assess response to therapy. Their value in the initial diagnosis of sepsis in the newborn period has yet to be clarified. The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) Committee on the Fetus and Newborn reiterated in a 2018 early-­onset sepsis guideline update that lab tests alone should not be used to diagnose sepsis. Cytokines (both proinflammatory cytokines such as interleukin [IL]-­6 and tumor necrosis factor-­α and antiinflam- matory cytokines such as IL-­4 and IL-­10), chemokines, and other bio- markers are increased in infected infants. Tables 148.8 and 148.9 list clinical features and laboratory param- eters that are useful in the diagnosis of neonatal infection or sepsis. GENERAL APPROACH TO MANAGEMENT In the absence of specific signs of focal infection, therapy for presumed infection in the neonate is often empirical and initiated on the basis of fever or hypothermia, listlessness, irritability, or apneic episodes. Anti- biotics are chosen to cover the organisms typically causing neonatal sepsis, including GBS, gram-­negative organisms, Listeria, and Entero- coccus. Because the latter two organisms are intrinsically resistant to cephalosporins, ampicillin is generally included in the empirical treat- ment of infants with presumed neonatal infection (Table 148.10). Ini- tiation of antibiotics within 1 hour of onset is recommended and has a survival advantage. An empirical regimen for suspected early-­onset infection in a term or late preterm infant includes ampicillin and gentamicin. This has long been a standard regimen for early-­onset sepsis and provides coverage for the most prevalent organisms, predominantly GBS and E. coli. Resistance of E. coli to ampicillin or gentamicin has been reported; approximately 1 in 10 isolates are resistant to both ampi- cillin and gentamicin. Ampicillin plus cefotaxime (if available) or cefepime may be substituted if the patient presents with infection after discharge from the nursery, or when infection with resistant E. coli is suspected. Ceftriaxone is typically not used in the neonatal period due to precipitation with intravenous calcium and displacement of bound bilirubin causing hyperbilirubinemia. There is concern that cephalosporins may be associated with higher rates of mortality in neonates compared to ampicillin and gentamicin. Alterations to the standard regimen may be appropriate in some circumstances, such as for critically ill newborns, with illness out of proportion to degree of prematurity, at highest risk of infection given maternal risk factors and delivery characteristics. HSV infection may present without cutaneous signs, in the absence of maternal history of infection, and in mothers receiving suppressive antiviral therapy. Therefore management of the ill newborn requires a high index of suspicion for HSV infection. Surface swabs, blood, and CSF are obtained for HSV culture or polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and empirical acyclovir is often recommended while the results of these studies are pending (see Chapters 220 and 299). Systemic infection caused by Candida spp. is a concern in hospital- ized infants, particularly extremely preterm infants with central venous access catheters and prior antibiotic and steroid exposure. Empirical therapy for fungal infection may be indicated for those at highest risk, as well as those with specific clinical signs such as erythematous rash, thrombocytopenia, hyperglycemia, and invasive devices. Definitive therapy is based on identification and susceptibility of the offending organism. In almost all circumstances, the narrowest antibi- otic with activity against the organism is chosen. Duration of therapy depends on the organism and the site of infection. In neonates with culture-­proven sepsis, the usual course of therapy is typically 7-­10 days. Longer treatment courses may be warranted if a specific focus of infec- tion is identified (e.g., meningitis, osteomyelitis, septic arthritis). Anti- microbial therapy should be altered based on the susceptibility profile of the pathogen isolated. In infants with a negative blood culture but a clinical status that remains concerning for a systemic inflammation, other etiologies and potential focal sources of infection should be investigated. Sepsis is unlikely in these infants if appropriately obtained blood cultures are sterile by 48 hours. PREVENTION Intrapartum antibiotics are used to reduce vertical transmission of GBS (Table 148.11), as well as to lessen neonatal morbidity associated with preterm labor and preterm premature rupture of membranes (see Chapter 230). With introduction of selective intrapartum anti- biotic prophylaxis to prevent perinatal transmission of GBS, rates of early-­onset neonatal GBS infection in the United States declined from 1.7/1,000 live births to 0.25/1,000. Intrapartum chemoprophylaxis does not reduce the rates of late-­onset GBS disease and has no effect on the rates of infection with non-­GBS pathogens. Of concern is a possible increase in gram-­negative infections (especially E. coli) despite a reduc- tion in early GBS sepsis by intrapartum antibiotics. Table 148.8     Evaluation of a Newborn for Infection or Sepsis HISTORY (SPECIFIC RISK FACTORS) Maternal infection during gestation or at parturition (type and duration of antimicrobial therapy): Urinary tract infection Chorioamnionitis Maternal colonization with group B Streptococci, Neisseria gonorrhoeae, herpes simplex Low gestational age/birthweight Multiple birth Duration of membrane rupture Complicated delivery Fetal tachycardia (distress) Age at onset (in utero, birth, early postnatal, late) Location at onset (hospital, community) Medical intervention: Vascular access Endotracheal intubation Parenteral nutrition Surgery EVIDENCE OF OTHER DISEASES* Congenital malformations (heart disease, neural tube defect) Respiratory tract disease (respiratory distress syndrome, aspiration) Necrotizing enterocolitis Metabolic disease (e.g., galactosemia) EVIDENCE OF FOCAL OR SYSTEMIC DISEASE General appearance, neurologic status Abnormal vital signs Organ system disease Feeding, stools, urine output, extremity movement LABORATORY STUDIES Evidence of Infection Culture from a normally sterile site (blood, CSF, other) Demonstration of a microorganism in tissue or fluid Molecular detection (blood, urine, CSF) by specific PCR and/or 16S ribosomal DNA Maternal or neonatal serology (syphilis, toxoplasmosis) Evidence of Inflammation Leukocytosis, increased immature/total neutrophil count ratio Acute-­phase reactants: C-­reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, procalcitonin, ferritin Cytokines: interleukin-­6, interleukin-­B, tumor necrosis factor Pleocytosis in CSF or synovial or pleural fluid Disseminated intravascular coagulation: fibrin degradation products, D-­dimer Evidence of Multiorgan System Disease Metabolic acidosis: pH, Pco2 Pulmonary function: Po2, Pco2 Renal function: blood urea nitrogen, creatinine Hepatic injury/function: bilirubin, alanine transaminase, aspartate transaminase, ammonia, prothrombin time, partial thromboplastin time Bone marrow function: neutropenia, anemia, thrombocytopenia *Diseases that increase the risk of infection or may overlap with signs of sepsis. CSF, Cerebrospinal fluid; PCR, polymerase chain reaction. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1150  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant Aggressive management of suspected maternal chorioamnionitis with antibiotic therapy during labor, along with rapid delivery of the infant, reduces the risk of early-­onset neonatal sepsis. Vertical trans- mission of GBS and early-­onset GBS disease is significantly reduced by selective intrapartum chemoprophylaxis (see Fig. 230.4) but does still occur. Neonatal infection with Chlamydia can be prevented by identification and treatment of infected pregnant women (see Chapter 272). Mother-­to-­child transmission of HIV is significantly reduced by maternal antiretroviral therapy during pregnancy, labor, and delivery, by cesarean delivery before rupture of membranes, and by antiretrovi- ral treatment of the infant after birth (see Chapter 322). Prevention of congenital and perinatal infections predominantly focuses on maternal health. The Centers for Disease Control and Pre- vention (CDC) recommends the following screening tests and treat- ment when indicated: 1.	All pregnant women should be offered voluntary and confiden- tial HIV testing at the first prenatal visit, as early in pregnancy as possible. HIV screening should be part of routine prenatal testing, unless the mother declines testing (opt-­out screening). For women at high risk of infection during pregnancy (multiple sexual partners or STIs during pregnancy, intravenous drug use, HIV-­infected partners), repeat testing in the third trimester is recommended. Rapid HIV screening is indicated for any women who presents in labor with an undocumented HIV status, unless she declines testing. 2.	A serologic test for syphilis should be performed on all pregnant women at the first prenatal visit. Repeat screenings early in the third trimester and again at delivery are recommended for wom- en in whom syphilis test results in the first trimester were positive and for those at high risk for infection during pregnancy. Infants should not be discharged from the hospital unless the syphilis status of the mother has been determined at least once during pregnancy and preferably again at delivery. 3.	Serologic testing for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) should be performed at the first prenatal visit, even if the woman has been previously vaccinated or tested. Women who were not screened prenatally, those who are at high risk for infection (multiple sex- ual partners, intravenous drug use, HBsAg-­positive sex partner), and those with clinical hepatitis should be retested at the time of delivery. 4.	A maternal genital culture for C. trachomatis should be performed at the first prenatal visit. Young women (<25 years) and those at increased risk for infection (new or multiple partners during preg- nancy) should be retested during the third trimester. 5.	A maternal culture for N. gonorrhoeae should be performed at the first prenatal visit. Those at high risk for infection should be retested in the third trimester. 6.	All pregnant women at high risk for hepatitis C infection (intrave- nous drug use, blood transfusion or organ transplantation before 1992) should be screened for hepatitis C antibodies at the first pre- natal visit. 7.	Evidence does not support routine testing for bacterial vaginosis in pregnancy. For asymptomatic women at high risk for preterm de- livery, testing may be considered. Symptomatic women should be tested and treated. 8.	The CDC recommends universal screening for vaginorectal GBS colonization of all pregnant women at 36 0/7 and 37 6/7 weeks of gestation and a screening-­based approach to selective intrapartum antibiotic prophylaxis against GBS (see Table 148.11) (see Figs. 230.2 and 230.3). Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Table 148.9     Culture-­Based and Non–Culture-­Based Diagnostics for Neonatal Sepsis CATEGORY PARAMETER OPTIMAL TIMING, VOLUME OF SPECIMEN, ROUTINE/INVESTIGATIONAL* APPLICABILITY FOR NEONATAL SEPSIS CULTURE BASED Blood Culture >1 mL of whole blood, from two sites Gold standard for bacteremia CSF Culture When clinically feasible Gold standard for bacterial meningitis Urine Culture >72 hr of life Not useful for EOS; indicated for LOS evaluation Tracheal aspirate Culture Neonates with endotracheal tube in place and signs of progressive respiratory distress Usually reflects colonization NON–CULTURE BASED Neutrophil indices Neutropenia Absolute neutrophil count Absolute immature neutrophil count After 12 hr of life Consider GA, delivery mode, altitude, arterial versus venous sampling, time since birth Neutropenia better predictor for sepsis than leukocytosis Neutrophil markers CD64 Elevated for 24 hr after infection Requires 50 μL blood Results within hours Investigational Cut points between 2.38 and 3.62 optimal sensitivity, specificity, and NPV for EOS Platelet count Thrombocytopenia and thrombocytosis Late findings; slow to respond Thrombocytopenia associated with fungal infection CSF cell count CSF WBC Uninfected neonates: mean 10 cells/mm3; range up to 20 cells/mm3 Does not predict culture-­proven meningitis CSF chemistries CSF protein CSF glucose Term <100 mg/dL Preterm higher; 70–80% of serum glucose Elevated in fungal meningitis Low glucose specific for bacterial meningitis Acute phase reactants CRP Procalcitonin 8-­24 hr after infection 2-­12 hr after infection Good NPV Better sensitivity but less specificity than CRP *Investigational refers to an assay or parameter that is undergoing evaluation for clinical use and applicability. CSF, Cerebrospinal fluid; EOS, early-­onset sepsis; GA, gestational age; LOS, late-­onset sepsis; MHC II, major histocompatibility complex class II; NPV, negative predictive value; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; WBC, white blood cell count. From Shane AL, Stoll BJ. Recent developments and current issues in the epidemiology, diagnosis, and management of bacterial and fungal neonatal sepsis. Am J Perinatol. 2013;30(2):131–141. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 148  u  Epidemiology of Infections  1151 Table 148.11     Indications for Intrapartum Antibiotic Prophylaxis to Prevent Early-­Onset Group B Streptococcus Disease INTRAPARTUM GBS PROPHYLAXIS INDICATED INTRAPARTUM GBS PROPHYLAXIS NOT INDICATED Previous infant with invasive GBS disease Colonization with GBS during a previous pregnancy (unless an indication for GBS prophylaxis is present for current pregnancy) GBS bacteriuria during any trimester of the current pregnancy GBS bacteriuria during previous pregnancy (unless another indication for GBS prophylaxis is present for current pregnancy) Positive GBS screening culture during current pregnancy (unless a cesarean delivery is performed before onset of labor or amniotic membrane rupture) Cesarean delivery before onset of labor or amniotic membrane rupture, regardless of GBS colonization status or gestational age Unknown GBS status at the onset of labor (culture not done, incomplete, or results unknown) and any of the following: Delivery at <37 weeks’ gestation* Amniotic membrane rupture ≥18 hr Intrapartum temperature ≥38.0°C (100.4°F)† Intrapartum NAAT‡ positive for GBS Negative vaginal and rectal GBS screening culture in late gestation during the current pregnancy, regardless of intrapartum risk factors *Recommendations for the use of intrapartum antibiotics for prevention of early-­onset GBS disease in the setting of threatened preterm delivery are presented in Chapter 230. †If amnionitis is suspected, broad-­spectrum antibiotic therapy that includes an agent known to be active against GBS should replace GBS prophylaxis. ‡If intrapartum NAAT is negative for GBS but any other intrapartum risk factor (delivery at <37 wk gestation, amniotic membrane rupture ≥18 hr, or temperature ≥38.0°C/100.4°F) is present, intrapartum antibiotic prophylaxis is indicated. GBS, Group B streptococcus; NAAT, nucleic acid amplification test. From Verani J, McGee L, Schrag S. Prevention of perinatal group B streptococcal disease—revised guidelines from CDC, 2010. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2010;59(RR-­10):1–36. Table 148.10     Management and Prevention of Neonatal Sepsis CONDITION THERAPY ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS EMPIRICAL MANAGEMENT Early-­onset sepsis Ampicillin + aminoglycoside 10 days for bacteremia; 14 days for GBS and uncomplicated meningitis; extend to 21-­28 days for complicated infections • Consider a third-­generation cephalosporin or carbapenem for meningitis or severe illness with high suspicion for gram-­negative infection • Tailor therapy to pathogen • Should discontinue empiric therapy if pathogen not isolated Late-­onset sepsis Vancomycin or antistaphylococcal penicillin (i.e., nafcillin, oxacillin) + aminoglycoside Duration dependent on pathogen and site • Gram-­positive coverage should be based on local epidemiology, MRSA colonization, CONS risk factors, and clinical presentation • Aminoglycoside-­based regimen preferred to cephalosporin given reduced risk of resistance • Consider cephalosporin if meningitis suspected • Consider a carbapenem if third-­generation cephalosporin recently received • Consider amphotericin for fungal etiologies • Tailor therapy to pathogen • Consider discontinuation of therapy if pathogen not isolated NONANTIMICROBIAL TREATMENT STRATEGIES Recombinant G-­CSF Recombinant GM-­CSF Enhance neutrophil number and function, but no reduction in infection when administered as prophylaxis or improvement in survival when administered as therapy Insufficient evidence to support the clinical use of G-­CSF or GM-­CSF either as treatment or prophylaxis to prevent systemic infections IVIG Augments antibody-­dependent cytotoxicity and improves neutrophilic function, but no evidence that IVIG in suspected or proven sepsis reduces death Insufficient evidence from 10 RCTs or quasi-­RCTs to support use in neonates with confirmed or suspected sepsis PREVENTION STRATEGIES IAP Administration of penicillin or ampicillin 4 hr before parturition Successfully reduces rates of EOS caused by GBS No effect on LOS GBS Fluconazole prophylaxis Administration of weight-­based dosing to neonates <1,500 g Most beneficial in NICUs with high baseline rates of invasive candidiasis BLF supplementation with a probiotic, Lactobacillus rhamnosus (GG) BLF is a human milk glycoprotein with a role in innate immune response LGG enhances the activity of lactoferrin BLF supplementation with and without LGG reduced the incidence of 1st LOS in 472 VLBW neonates in large randomized, double-­blind RCT Additional confirmatory studies warranted BLF, Bovine lactoferrin supplementation; CONS, coagulase-­negative staphylococci; EOS, early-­onset sepsis; GBS, group B Streptococcus; G-­CSF, granulocyte colony-­stimulating factor; GM-­CSF, granulocyte-­macrophage colony-­stimulating factor; IAP, intrapartum antimicrobial prophylaxis; IVIG, intravenous immunoglobulin, LGG, Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG; LOS, late-­onset sepsis; MRSA, methicillin-­resistant Staphylococcus aureus; NICU, neonatal intensive care unit; RCTs, randomized controlled trials; VLBW, very low birthweight. Data from Carr R, Modi N, Doré C. G-­CSF and GM-­CSF for treating or preventing neonatal infections. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2003;(3):CD003066. Brocklehurst P, Farrell B, King A, et al. INIS Collaborative Group: Treatment of neonatal sepsis with intravenous immune globulin. N Engl J Med. 2011;365:1201–1211. Manzoni P, Decembrino L, Stolfi I, et al. Italian Task Force for the Study and Prevention of Neonatal Fungal Infections; Italian Society of Neonatology: Lactoferrin and prevention of late-­onset sepsis in the pre-­term neonates. Early Hum Dev. 2010;86(Suppl 1):59–61. From Shane AL, Stoll BJ. Recent developments and current issues in the epidemiology, diagnosis, and management of bacterial and fungal neonatal sepsis. Am J Perinatol. 2013;30(2):131–141. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1152  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant Infections are a frequent and important cause of neonatal morbidity and mortality. Congenital or intrauterine infections (i.e., those trans- mitted across the placenta) and perinatal infections (i.e., those trans- mitted from the mother to the fetus or newborn infant during the birth process) represent two major routes of neonatal infection. 149.1  Congenital Infections Sallie R. Permar and Emma L. Mohr In utero infections are caused by a variety of etiologic agents, including bacteria, viruses, fungi, and protozoa. Clinical manifestations of con- genital infectious diseases in neonates can range from asymptomatic or subclinical to life-­threatening disease. History and physical exami- nation findings, in addition to laboratory testing and/or radiologic imaging, provide insight into the best approach for prevention and treatment of congenital infectious diseases in this immunologically immature population (see Fig. 148.2 and Table 148.2). GENERAL APPROACH Prenatal counseling on methods to prevent congenital infections is the best approach for improving infant outcomes. Once a fetus or infant is suspected of having a congenital or perinatal infection, infectious as well as noninfectious processes, such as underlying congenital heart disease, genetic disorders, and inborn errors of metabolism, should be considered in the differential diagnosis. Because maternal infection is a prerequisite for infection in the fetus, a thorough history is essential to assess the mother for her symptoms, travel, diet, medication use, occu- pational exposures, and any sexually transmitted infections (STIs) during pregnancy. Clinical manifestations are varied and overlap for many of the pathogens causing intrauterine infection. Laboratory test- ing and/or radiologic imaging is often required to confirm the diagno- sis. Treatment depends on the specific pathogen and can range from symptomatic management with close follow-­up for long-­term sequelae to targeted antimicrobial therapy. PATHOGENESIS The route and timing of infection can provide helpful clues as to the potential infectious etiology (Fig. 149.1 and Table 149.1). First-­ trimester infection may alter embryogenesis and result in malforma- tions of the heart and eyes, as seen in congenital rubella syndrome. Third-­trimester infection (e.g., congenital toxoplasmosis) can result in active infection with signs of hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, and gener- alized lymphadenopathy at birth. Infections that occur late in gestation (e.g., congenital syphilis) may lead to a delay in clinical manifestations until weeks to years after birth. Intrauterine infection from cytomegalovirus (CMV), Treponema pallidum, Toxoplasma gondii, rubella virus, varicella-­zoster virus (VZV), and human parvovirus B19 may cause minimal or no symp- toms in the mother but still may be transmitted across the placenta to the fetus. The presence of maternal antibodies to rubella prevents maternal infection and congenital transmission, but transmission across the placenta of CMV can occur despite preexisting immunity, albeit at a lower rate compared to primary maternal CMV infection. Regardless of the mother’s immune status, the placenta may act as a barrier, and the fetus may or may not be infected. If infection occurs, signs may or may not be noted in the fetus during pregnancy. Infection can result in spontaneous abortion, congenital malformation, intra- uterine growth restriction (IUGR), premature birth, stillbirth, acute or delayed disease in the neonate, or asymptomatic persistent infection with sequelae later in life. PREVENTION Prevention of congenital infections includes behavioral and thera- peutic interventions. Counseling-­based interventions are effective in reducing CMV infection, but few healthcare providers report counsel- ing their patients on CMV prevention. Counseling on hygienic prac- tices, such as washing hands after diaper changes and avoiding contact with saliva, decreases CMV transmission risk. Safer sex practices, safe food preparation practices, and preventing mosquito bites are some of the recommendations that prevent congenital and perinatal infections. Prenatal and maternal vaccination and control of existing maternal infections are other strategies of preventing congenital infection. Pre- vention recommendations are presented in Table 149.2. CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS The clinical manifestations of intrauterine infections can range from asymptomatic to severe multiorgan system complications. For some agents (e.g., CMV, T. pallidum), ongoing injury after birth can lead to late sequelae as well. The specific clinical signs in the newborn period are usually not sufficient to make a definitive diagnosis but are useful to guide more specific laboratory testing. Symptomatic congenital infec- tions often affect the central nervous system (CNS; brain and eyes) and the reticuloendothelial system (RES; bone marrow, liver, and spleen). Table 149.3 presents the clinical manifestations of some specific con- genital infections. Congenital Zika virus infection has features that are rarely seen with other congenital infections (Table 149.4). For example, no hematologic or hepatic laboratory abnormalities have been docu- mented in infants with congenital Zika virus infection. Table 149.5 pro- vides late sequelae of some congenital infections. Chapter 149 Congenital and Perinatal Infections Sallie R. Permar and Emma L. Mohr Maternal infection Bloodstream invasion No fetal or placental infection Placental infection Fetal infection No fetal infection No effect on growth or viability Effects on growth and viability Embryonic death and resorption Abortion and stillbirth Premature infant Term infant Intrauterine growth restriction Develop- mental anomalies Congenital disease Normal infant Persistent postnatal infection Eradication of infection Progressive tissue damage leading to sequelae or death No apparent disease Sequelae of infection Fig. 149.1  Pathogenesis of hematogenous transplacental infections. (Adapted from Klein JO, Remington JS. Current concepts of infections of the fetus and newborn infant. In: Remington JS, Klein JO, eds. Infec- tious Diseases of the Fetus and Newborn Infant, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2002.) Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 149  u  Congenital and Perinatal Infections  1153 DIAGNOSIS During Pregnancy The presence of IUGR or a physical abnormality on a prenatal fetal ultrasound raises concern for a congenital infection. The well-­known acronym TORCH—T. gondii, Other (T. pallidum, human parvovirus B19, HIV, Zika virus, others), Rubella, Cytomegalovirus, and Herpes simplex virus (HSV)—is a historical mnemonic but is less useful given the number of other infections that need to be considered. The routine ordering of TORCH serology panels is not recommended because the presence of a pathogen-­specific IgG response in the mother indicates past infection but does not establish if the infection occurred during pregnancy. Maternal IgM titers to specific pathogens are only moder- ately sensitive, and a negative result cannot be used to exclude infec- tion. Testing the mother for the pathogen of concern itself, such as testing for CMV, HIV, or Zika viremia, can shed some light onto the potential congenital pathogens of concern. In certain cases, a fetal blood sample with cordocentesis can be obtained and tested for total and pathogen-­specific IgM assays, polymerase chain reaction assays (PCRs), or cultures. A positive pathogen-­specific IgM test is strongly suggestive of infection, but a negative test does not rule out the organism as the cause of the fetopathy. Amniotic fluid can also be obtained and sent for PCR or culture. The presence of CMV, T. gondii, or human parvovirus B19 in amniotic fluid indicates the fetus likely is infected but cannot establish the severity of disease. Although HSV is included in the TORCH acronym, it is rarely isolated from amniotic fluid and is rarely transmitted across the placenta from mother to fetus. Fetal blood can be collected to test for human parvovirus B19 IgM and PCR. Newborn Infant When a congenital infection is suspected because clinical signs are present at birth, a complete blood count with differential and platelet count along with measurements of transaminases and total/direct bili- rubin are routinely performed. Additional evaluations may include a dilated funduscopic examination for retinopathy, auditory brainstem response (ABR) for those failing the newborn hearing screen, and CNS imaging. If available, pathologic examination of the placenta and/or cord may be informative. Infectious diseases consultation is valuable in guiding the evaluation. Neonatal antibody titers for specific pathogens are often difficult to interpret because IgG is acquired from the mother by transplacental passage, and a positive result may reflect the mother’s past infection and not infection of the newborn. Neonatal IgM antibody titers to spe- cific pathogens have high specificity and only moderate sensitivity; a negative result cannot be used to exclude infection. Paired maternal and fetal-­neonatal IgG antibody titers showing higher or rising infant IgG antibodies can diagnose some congenital infections (e.g., syphilis). Total cord blood IgM and IgA are not actively transported across the placenta to the fetus yet are not specific or sensitive enough for intra- uterine infection. PCR testing of infant saliva, urine, and/or blood for CMV and other viral infections is sensitive, specific, and widely accepted over virus cultures, yet should be performed within the first 2 weeks of life to distinguish congenital infection from perinatal or postnatal infection. The Palo Alto Medical Foundation Toxoplasma Serology Laboratory (PAMF-­TSL; Palo Alto, CA: www.pamf.org/serology/; telephone: (650) 853-­4828; e-­mail: remingtonlab@sutterhealth.org) offers specialized tests and physician experts to aid in the diagno- sis of congenital toxoplasmosis. Testing for Zika virus with real-­ time reverse-­transcription PCR (rRT-­PCR) from neonatal urine and serum and IgM enzyme-­linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) from neonatal serum is recommended. However, the most reliable method of testing has not been established. In endemic areas, this workup Table 149.1     Specific Agents in Effects of Transplacental Fetal Infection on the Fetus and Newborn Infant ORGANISM DISEASE PREMATURITY INTRAUTERINE GROWTH RESTRICTION/LOW BIRTHWEIGHT DEVELOPMENTAL ANOMALIES CONGENITAL DISEASE PERSISTENT POSTNATAL INFECTION Viruses CMV HSV Rubeola Smallpox HBV HIV* SARS-­CoV-­2 Zika CMV Rubella VZV* HIV Zika CMV Rubella VZV Coxsackievirus B* HIV Zika CMV Rubella VZV HSV Mumps* Rubeola Vaccinia Smallpox Coxsackievirus B Poliovirus HBV HIV LCV Parvovirus Zika CMV Rubella VZV HSV HBV HIV Zika Bacteria Treponema pallidum Mycobacterium tuberculosis Listeria monocytogenes Campylobacter fetus Salmonella typhi T. pallidum M. tuberculosis L. monocytogenes C. fetus S. typhi Borrelia burgdorferi T. pallidum M. tuberculosis Protozoa Toxoplasma gondii Plasmodium* Trypanosoma cruzi T. gondii Plasmodium T. cruzi T. gondii Plasmodium T. cruzi T. gondii Plasmodium *Association of effect with infection has been suggested and is under consideration. CMV, Cytomegalovirus; HBV, hepatitis B virus; HSV, herpes simplex virus; LCV, lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus; SARS-­CoV-­2, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2; VZV, varicella-­zoster virus. From Maldonado YA, Nizet V, Klein JO, et al. Current concepts of infections of the fetus and newborn infant. In: Wilson CB, Nizet V, Maldonado Y, et al., eds. Remington and Klein’s Infectious Diseases of the Fetus and Newborn, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016. Tables 1–5; and from Woodworth KR, Olsen EO, Neelam V, et al. Birth and Infant Outcomes Following Laboratory-­Confirmed SARS-­CoV-­2 Infection in Pregnancy -­ SET-­NET, 16 Jurisdictions, March 29-­October 14, 2020. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2020;69:1635–40. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1154  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant should be done soon after delivery because it is difficult to distin- guish congenital from perinatal and postnatal infection if testing is done later. SPECIFIC INFECTIOUS AGENTS Important congenital infections include more than the TORCH agents. The following is a list of pathogens that may be transmitted across the placenta and the respective chapters where they are discussed in more detail, including treatment. Bacteria Listeria monocytogenes (Chapter 234) Syphilis (Treponema pallidum) (Chapter 264) Viruses Cytomegalovirus (Chapter 302) Hepatitis B (Chapter 406) Hepatitis C (Chapter 406) Herpes simplex virus (Chapter 299) Human immunodeficiency virus (Chapter 322) Human parvovirus B19 (Chapter 298) Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (Chapter 318) Rubella (Chapter 294) Varicella-­zoster virus (Chapter 300) Zika virus (Chapter 314.12) Parasite Toxoplasmosis (Toxoplasma gondii) (Chapter 336) 149.2  Perinatal Infections Sallie R. Permar and Emma L. Mohr Perinatal infections are defined as those that are transmitted from the mother to the fetus or newborn infant during the birth process. Despite recommended universal screening of pregnant women for Chlamydia trachomatis, gonorrhea, and group B streptococcus (GBS), transmis- sion to the newborn still occurs. In addition to these STIs, other bacte- ria, viruses, and Candida spp. may cause perinatal infections. Similar to congenital infections, their presentation can range from asymptomatic to a sepsis-­like syndrome. GENERAL APPROACH The general approach is like that for congenital infections and includes a detailed maternal history and a careful examination of the newborn (see Chapter 148). Many clinical syndromes overlap; therefore labo- ratory testing is usually required to establish a specific microbiologic etiology and guide management decisions. PATHOGENESIS The human birth canal is colonized with aerobic and anaerobic bac- teria. Ascending amniotic infection may occur with either appar- ently intact membranes or relatively brief duration of membrane rupture. Infectious agents can also be acquired as the newborn infant passes through the vaginal canal. This acquisition may result in either colonization or disease. Factors influencing which colo- nized infants will experience disease are not well understood but include prematurity, underlying illness, invasive procedures, inocu- lum size, virulence of the infecting organism, genetic predisposi- tion, the innate immune system, host response, and transplacental maternal antibodies. Chorioamnionitis has been historically used to refer to microbial invasion of the amniotic fluid, often as a result of prolonged rupture of the chorioamniotic membrane for >18 hours. The term chorioamnion- itis is confusing because it does not convey the spectrum of inflamma- tory or infectious diseases, it leaves out other intrauterine components that can be involved (e.g., decidua), and it results in significant vari- ability in clinical practice, with the potential for a significant number of well newborns being exposed to antimicrobial agents. The term intra- uterine inflammation or infection at birth, abbreviated as Triple I, is preferred because of the heterogeneous nature of conditions that can affect the mother and neonate (Table 149.6). Regardless of the defini- tion used, prematurity (<37 weeks) is associated with a greater risk of early-­onset sepsis, especially with GBS. Aspiration or ingestion of bacteria in amniotic fluid may lead to con- genital pneumonia or systemic infection, with manifestations becom- ing apparent before delivery (fetal distress, tachycardia), at delivery (failure to breathe, respiratory distress, shock), or after a latent period of a few hours (respiratory distress, shock). Aspiration or ingestion of bacteria during the birth process may lead to infection after an interval of 1-­2 days. CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS Most perinatal infections present clinically during the first month of life. Initial signs and symptoms may be either nonspecific or focal (see Chapter 148). Additional information on specific infectious agents and their management are reviewed in the chapters indicated below. SPECIFIC INFECTIOUS AGENTS Bacteria Chlamydia trachomatis (Chapter 272) Escherichia coli (Chapter 246) Genital mycoplasmas (Chapter 270) Group B streptococci (Chapter 230) Neisseria gonorrhoeae (Chapter 238) Syphilis (Treponema pallidum) (Chapter 264) Table 149.2     Prevention Strategies for Congenital and Perinatal Infections PATHOGEN PREVENTION STRATEGY CMV Hygienic education to avoid direct contact with toddler urine/saliva, avoid new sexual partners HSV Prevention of maternal STI near delivery and exposure of newborn to active maternal lesions VZV Vaccination of nonpregnant women of childbearing age with a negative varicella history or vaccine immunity Rubella virus Vaccination of nonpregnant women of childbearing age with no immunization history HIV Safe sex practices; maternal treatment with HAART on infection SARS-­CoV-­2 Prenatal and maternal vaccination, masking, and social distancing Zika virus Prevention of mosquito bites and safe sex practices with persons who have recently traveled to endemic areas Toxoplasma gondii Avoiding undercooked meat, avoiding unpasteurized goat milk, avoiding raw mollusks, avoid contact with litter or soil potentially contaminated with cat feces Treponema pallidum Safe sex practices; screening in nonpregnant populations HSV, Herpes simplex virus; CMV, cytomegalovirus; VZV, varicella-­zoster virus; SARS-­ CoV-­2, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2; STI, sexually transmitted infection; HAART, highly active antiretroviral therapy. From Auriti C, De Rose DU, Santisi A, et al. Pregnancy and viral infections: Mechanisms of fetal damage, diagnosis and prevention of neonatal adverse outcomes from cytomegalovirus to SARS-­CoV-­2 and Zika virus. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Basis Dis. 2021;1867:1–17; Maldonado YA, Read JS. American Academy of pediatrics committee on infectious diseases: diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of congenital toxoplasmosis in the United States. Pediatrics. 2017;139(2):e20163860; US Preventive Services Task Force: Screening for syphilis infection in pregnant women, February 2018. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 149  u  Congenital and Perinatal Infections  1155 Table 149.3     Clinical Manifestations of Specific Neonatal Infections Acquired in Utero or at Delivery RUBELLA VIRUS CYTOMEGALOVIRUS TOXOPLASMA GONDII HERPES SIMPLEX VIRUS TREPONEMA PALLIDUM ENTEROVIRUSES ZIKA VIRUS Hepatosplenomegaly Jaundice Pneumonitis Petechiae or purpura Meningoencephalitis Hydrocephalus Adenopathy Hearing deficits Myocarditis Congenital defects* Bone lesions* Glaucoma* Chorioretinitis or retinopathy* Cataracts* Microphthalmia Hepatosplenomegaly Jaundice Pneumonitis Petechiae or purpura Meningoencephalitis Hydrocephalus Microcephaly* Intracranial calcifications* Hearing deficits Chorioretinitis or retinopathy Optic atrophy Hepatosplenomegaly Jaundice Pneumonitis Petechiae or purpura Meningoencephalitis Hydrocephalus* Microcephaly Maculopapular exanthems Intracranial calcifications* Myocarditis Bone lesions Chorioretinitis or retinopathy* Cataracts Optic atrophy Microphthalmia Uveitis Sensorineural hearing loss* Hepatosplenomegaly Jaundice Pneumonitis Petechiae or purpura Meningoencephalitis Hydrocephalus Microcephaly Maculopapular exanthems Vesicles* Myocarditis Chorioretinitis or retinopathy Cataracts Conjunctivitis or keratoconjunctivitis* Hepatosplenomegaly Jaundice Pneumonitis Petechiae or purpura Meningoencephalitis Adenopathy Maculopapular exanthems* Bone lesions* Glaucoma Chorioretinitis or retinopathy Uveitis Hepatosplenomegaly Jaundice Pneumonitis Petechiae or purpura Meningoencephalitis Adenopathy Maculopapular exanthems Paralysis* Myocarditis* Conjunctivitis Keratoconjunctivitis Fetal brain disruption sequence* Cortical thinning Ventriculomegaly Microcephaly Microphthalmia or coloboma Cataracts Contractures Hearing deficits Epilepsy Hyper/hypotonia *Has diagnostic significance for this infection. Adapted from Maldonado YA, Nizet V, Klein JO, et al. Current concepts of infections of the fetus and newborn infant. In: Wilson CB, Nizet V, Maldonado Y, et al., eds. Remington and Klein’s Infectious Diseases of the Fetus and Newborn, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Tables 1–6; with data from Moore CA, Staples JE, Dobyns WB, et al. Characterizing the pattern of anomalies in congenital zika syndrome for pediatric clinicians. JAMA Pediatr. 2017;171(3):288–295. Table 149.4     Syndromes in the Neonate Caused by Congenital Infections ORGANISM SIGNS Toxoplasma gondii Hydrocephalus, diffuse intracranial calcification, chorioretinitis Rubella virus Cardiac defects, sensorineural hearing loss, cataracts, microcephaly, “blueberry muffin” skin lesions, hepatomegaly, interstitial pneumonitis, myocarditis, disturbances in bone growth, intrauterine growth restriction CMV Microcephaly, periventricular calcifications, jaundice, petechiae or purpura, hepatosplenomegaly, intrauterine growth restriction, sensorineural hearing loss HSV Skin vesicles or scarring, eye scarring, microcephaly or hydranencephaly, vesicular skin rash, keratoconjunctivitis, meningoencephalitis, sepsis with hepatic failure Treponema pallidum Bullous, macular, or eczematous skin lesions involving palms and soles; rhinorrhea; dactylitis and other signs of osteochondritis and periostitis; hepatosplenomegaly; lymphadenopathy VZV Limb hypoplasia, cicatricial skin lesions, ocular abnormalities, cortical atrophy Parvovirus B19 Nonimmune hydrops fetalis HIV Severe thrush, failure to thrive, recurrent bacterial infections, calcification of basal ganglia Zika virus Microcephaly, lissencephaly, cerebellar hypoplasia, akinesia syndrome, macular scarring, retinal mottling, subcortical calcifications, hypertonia HSV, Herpes simplex virus; CMV, cytomegalovirus; VZV, varicella-­zoster virus. From Maldonado YA, Nizet V, Klein JO, et al. Current concepts of infections of the fetus and newborn infant. In Wilson CB, Nizet V, Maldonado Y, et al., eds. Remington and Klein’s Infectious Diseases of the Fetus and Newborn, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Tables 1–7. Table 149.5     Late Sequelae of Intrauterine Infections CLINICAL SIGN INFECTION CMV RUBELLA VIRUS TOXOPLASMA GONDII TREPONEMA PALLIDUM ZIKA VIRUS Hearing loss + + + + + Dental/skeletal problems (−) + (−) + + Developmental delays + + + + + Seizures + + + + + +, Present; (−), rare or absent; CMV, cytomegalovirus. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 1156  Part X  u  The Fetus and the Neonatal Infant Table 149.6     Classification of Triple I and Isolated Maternal Fever TERMINOLOGY FEATURES Isolated maternal fever Maternal oral temperature ≥39°C is considered a “documented fever” If the oral temperature is ≥38°C but ≤39°C, repeat the measurement in 30 min If the repeat value is ≥38°C, it is considered a “documented fever” Suspected Triple I Fever without a clear source with any of the following: 1.	 Baseline fetal tachycardia (>160 beats/min for 10 min) 2.	 Maternal WBC >15,000/mm3 in the absence of corticosteroids 3.	 Purulent fluid from the cervical os Confirmed Triple I All the above (from suspected Triple I) with any of the following: 1.	 Amniocentesis-­proven infection through positive Gram stain 2.	 Low glucose of amniotic fluid or positive amniotic fluid culture 3.	 Placental pathology consistent with infection Triple I, Intrauterine inflammation or infection at birth; WBC, white blood cell count. Adapted from Higgins RD, Saade G; Chorioamnionitis Workshop participants: Evaluation and management of women and newborns with a maternal diagnosis of chorioamnionitis: summary of a workshop. Obstet Gynecol 2016;127(3):426–436. Table 149.7     Laboratory Tests in the Diagnosis of Specific Perinatal Infections INFECTIOUS AGENT ACCEPTABLE SPECIMEN(S) FROM INFANT UNLESS OTHERWISE INDICATED LABORATORY TEST Chlamydia trachomatis Conjunctiva, nasopharyngeal swab, tracheal aspirate DFA or culture using special transport media NAATs are not FDA-­approved for specimens from neonates* Genital mycoplasmas (Mycoplasma hominis, M. genitalium, Ureaplasma urealyticum) Tracheal aspirate, blood, CSF Culture using special transport media NAATs Neisseria gonorrhoeae Conjunctiva, blood, CSF, synovial fluid Finding gram-­negative intracellular diplococci on Gram stain is suggestive Culture on special media establishes the diagnosis Syphilis (Treponema pallidum) Serum (mother) A nontreponemal test (RPR or VDRL) and if reactive, a specific treponemal test† or reverse-­sequence screening: specific treponemal test and if reactive, a quantitative nontreponemal test Serum RPR/VDRL CSF VDRL Cytomegalovirus Urine, saliva (with confirmational urine), blood, or CSF (if CNS involvement) CMV DNA PCR Obtained within 3 wk of birth Enteroviruses Blood, nasopharyngeal swab, throat swab, conjunctival swab, tracheal aspirate, urine, stool, rectal swab, vesicle fluid, CSF PCR Cell culture (sensitivity depends on serotype and cell lines used) Hepatitis B Serum (mother) HBsAg Serum If mother’s HBsAg is positive, at age 9 mo, test the infant for HBsAg and hepatitis B surface antibody Herpes simplex viruses 1 and 2 Conjunctiva, skin vesicle scraping, whole blood, mouth vesicles PCR or cell culture CSF PCR “Surface cultures” (mouth, nasopharynx, conjunctiva, and anus) PCR or cell culture HIV Serum (mother) Fourth-­generation HIV antigen/antibody test Whole blood (infant) HIV DNA PCR (performed on peripheral blood mononuclear cells) or RNA PCR (performed on plasma) Candida species Blood, skin biopsy, or CSF Culture Zika virus Blood, urine RNA PCR Also assay CSF for RNA if obtained for other reasons Blood IgM antibodies Also assay CSF for IgM if obtained for other reasons SARS-­CoV-­2 Nasopharynx, oropharynx, nose, saliva, trachea RT-­PCR or direct antigen testing *Published evaluations of NAATs for these indications are limited, but sensitivity and specificity is expected to be at least as high as those for culture. †Treponemal tests include the T. pallidum particle agglutination (TP-­PA) test, T. pallidum enzyme immunoassay (TP-­EIA), T. pallidum chemiluminescent assay (TP-­CIA), and fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption (FTA-­ABS) test. DFA, Direct immunofluorescence assay; NAAT, Nucleic acid amplification test; FDA, U.S. Food and Drug Administration; CSF, Cerebrospinal fluid; VDRL, Venereal Disease Research Laboratories; RPR, rapid plasma reagin; HBsAg, hepatitis B surface antigen; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; SARS-­CoV-­2, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2; RT-­PCR, reverse-­transcription polymerase chain reaction. Created with data from pathogen-­specific chapters within Kimberlin DW, Barnett ED, Lynfield R, Sawyer MH, eds. Redbook: 2021-­2024 Report of the Committee on Infectious Diseases, 32nd ed. Itasca, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics; 2018; p. 729–744. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Chapter 149  u  Congenital and Perinatal Infections  1157 Viruses Cytomegalovirus (Chapter 302) Enteroviruses (Chapter 297) Hepatitis B (Chapter 406) Herpes simplex virus (Chapter 299) Human immunodeficiency virus (Chapter 322) Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (Chapter 311) Fungi Candida spp. (Chapter 280) DIAGNOSIS The maternal history provides important information about mater- nal exposures to infectious diseases, bacterial colonization, immunity (natural and acquired), and obstetric risk factors (prematurity, pro- longed ruptured membranes, chorioamnionitis). STIs acquired by a pregnant woman, including syphilis, N. gonorrhoeae, and C. trachoma- tis, have the potential for perinatal transmission. Neonates with perinatal infections often present with nonspecific symptoms and signs; therefore the general diagnostic evaluation for the ill neonate as discussed in Chapter 202 should be followed. Table 149.7 provides a summary of laboratory tests that are useful to diag- nose specific perinatal infections. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.